Finland submitted its first Voluntary National Review to the United Nations in 2016, 
among the first Governments. In that report, Finland presented its preparedness to 
take serious action to implement the 2030 Agenda by introducing the institutional 
mechanisms, tools and plans that were already in place or needed to be established. 
It also highlighted Finland’s baseline in relation to the SDGs and described where the 
biggest strengths and weaknesses in the implementation lied. The first VNR was a useful
report in compiling all the ideas and plans into one document providing a future roadmap.
In addition, it served as an effective tool to communicate on the 2030 Agenda throughout
society. 
//
In 2017, the Government of Finland made the decision to report on its progress towards
achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development every four year. The VNR2020
is thus providing a comprehensive overview of progress made since the first Voluntary
National Review. 
//
In this report, Finland is following the guidelines by the United Nations as regards the
structure and headlines of the report. The core content of the report includes the sciencebased analysis on the progress on goals and targets (Chapter 6) where all the 17 SDGs
and 169 targets are assessed. This assessment will give a very detailed picture of Finland’s
performance in the implementation: where we have succeeded and where there are gaps
to overcome. 
//
The specific flavour in Finland’s VNR2020 comes from the broad engagement of key
stakeholders in the preparation of the report. For over 25 years, multi-stakeholder
participation has been the Finnish way to enhance sustainable development throughout
society. The existing mechanisms, like the National Commission on Sustainable
Development and the Finnish Development Policy Committee, have been the backbone
for stakeholder engagement also in the preparation of this report. 
//
In addition, the VNR2020 includes new approaches for intensified participation, most
pertinent being the invitation by the Government to several stakeholders to provide their own assessments on the progress made as part of the VNR report. This invitation
was received by civil society, cities, business organisations and regional authorities. For
example, over 50 actors of civil society, including NGOs and trade unions, have assessed
Finland’s performance on every SDG. VNR also includes chapters written by the Sámi
people, the only indigenous peoples’ group in the continental territory of the European
Union. Their status as an indigenous people is enshrined in the Constitution of Finland.
Also Åland, which is an autonomous, demilitarized and Swedish-speaking archipelago off
the southwest coast of Finland, has contributed to the report on Åland’s approach and
measures to the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Another innovation in the VNR2020 is the Peer Dialogue with Mozambique and
Switzerland. Finland asked the Governments of Mozambique and Switzerland to review
the draft report and the preparatory process. The Peer Dialogue followed a very light
procedure, but the external view and recommendations were extremely useful for Finland
in finalizing the report. 
//
National follow-up and review system has been in place in Finland for four years now,
including a set of national indicators for sustainable development that complement the
global SDG indicators. This system has been the foundation of evidence-based systematic
monitoring of the national policies and measures. As part of the mechanism, the first
national comprehensive Sustainable Development Policy Evaluation after the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda was published in February 2019. This evaluation report provided
valuable input to the preparation of the Finnish VNR2020, as did several other national
and international assessments, evaluations and reports. 
//
The Finnish model for sustainable development is based on high-level political leadership,
participation of stakeholders in the policy-making, decisions based on multidisciplinary
science, and solutions that aim to integrate the three dimension of sustainable
development in a coherent and mutually supportive manner. These cornerstones of the
Finnish model are supported by the institutional structures and innovative mechanisms
and tools, including the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Network, Prime Minister led
National Commission on Sustainable Development, Society’s Commitment to Sustainable
Development and Expert Panel on Sustainable Development.
//
Finland has integrated the 2030 Agenda, the United Nation’s Framework Convention
on Climate Change, the Paris Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol into its development
policy. Integration of climate change has been one of the cross-cutting objectives of
Finland’s development policy and development cooperation since 2012. Finland is
also fully committed to the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction and supports its custodian, the UN office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR). 
Finland works towards a reduction of disaster risk and losses in all its work to facilitate
development. 
//
Nationally, the 2030 Agenda is the framework for many national strategies, plans and
policies in Finland, including Government’s Implementation Plan for the 2030 Agenda.
However, the Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development remains a challenge, not
only regarding the policy sectors horizontally, but also when it comes to Finland’s policies
and measures in international and European Union cooperation. 
//
The 2030 Agenda has become well known in Finland. This has significantly helped the
preparation of this second VNR. Guidelines and support from the UN have given clear
structure for the preparation, and made it possible to start the preparations in good
time. 
//
The 2030 Agenda is at the core of the mandates of the National Commission on
Sustainable Development and Finland’s Development Policy Committee, so they were
well prepared to contribute to the VNR. 
//
In four years time, many international benchmark studies and reports have been
prepared and national statistical reports and evaluations have become available. 
National follow up and review mechanisms are in place. The availability of data,
evaluations, research and reports has provided a strong evidence base for the VNR.
//
Following Finland’s participatory approach, civil society actors have been invited to
present their independent assessment of Finland’s progress in each SDG, alongside with
the assessments of state authorities. Moreover, the VNR includes several CASE-chapters
written by different stakeholders.  
//
In a country-level Peer Dialogue, the Governments of Mozambique and Switzerland
commented a draft version of the VNR and gave valuable support to its finalisation. 
//
The Prime Minister’s Office has been responsible for the coordination and compilation of
this second Voluntary National Review of Finland. The first VNR was submitted to the UN in
2016, and Finland is committed to reporting to the UN on a regular basis, every four to five
years.
//
The Prime Minister’s Office prepared an engagement plan and roadmap for the
preparation of the VNR in September 2019, and preparations have followed this plan
(Figure 1). All Ministries have been involved in the preparation by official requests and
through Inter-Ministerial coordination Network composed of Ministries’ sustainable
development focal points (7, 8, 22). Also, an official editorial board was established to
support the preparation (3). The VNR has been discussed in the meeting of Permanent
Secretaries and approved in the meeting of the Government (20). The VNR has also been
discussed in an official meeting of the Committee for the Future in the Parliament (17). 
//
In addition, the two national Commissions that are mandated to oversee the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Finland – National Commission on Sustainable
Development and Finland’s Development Policy Committee – are in key position in
channelling the views of civil society and other stakeholders to the report. The VNR 2020
process started in September 2019 by a joint meeting of these two multi-stakeholder
bodies (1), followed by multiple seminars, workshops, consultations and meetings,
including a ‘VNR key messages’ workshop (19) with different stakeholders groups (2, 12, 13,
22). Moreover, the expertise of the two key advisory bodies of the National Commission on
Sustainable Development, the Expert Panel on Sustainable Development (5) and the 2030
Agenda Youth Group (6), was utilized along the process. Specific advice was asked from
the group of Sustainability Elders (14) and the Santa Claus himself (15). 
//
The Finnish VNR relies on existing data and recently published evaluations, research
studies and reports, which have been made out by several independent bodies like
Finnish National Audit Office, national statistical authorities and other institutions (4, 5, 9,
22). A specific seminar on basic and fundamental rights was organized to advice the Prime
Minister’s Office on critical issues regarding LNOB in Finland (16). 
//
Like in 2016, Finland’s VNR process 2019–2020 has been based on existing sustainable
development participation mechanisms and structures. However, this time the level of
participation and ownership has been taken even further: the stakeholders have not only
been consulted, but invited to independently write parts of the report (10). 
//
The essence of this VNR is the assessment of progress in each SDG. In this report, each
SDG progress description consists of two independent assessments: one made by state authorities and statistical office (4, 8), the other made by a group of civil society actors (11).
The national development NGOs umbrella organisation Fingo was invited by the Prime
Minister’s Office to take the lead in bringing together the views and reflections of the civil
society on the SDG progress to be incorporated into Finland’s VNR2020. 
//
All together 57 Finnish civil society actors participated in the process of estimating
Finland’s performance on all the 17 SDGs, from few to up to 12 actors on each goal. They
represent different actors of the Finnish civil society, from small to big ones, from trade
unions or national umbrella organizations of social sector to CSOs mainly working on
development cooperation or smaller activist-based actors. 
The aim was to give voice to the non-governmental actors in the official report, and
thereby strengthen the dialogue between the Government and the civil society in Finland. 
The use of participatory mechanisms is the backbone of Finland’s follow-up and review
functions. Finland has established an interactive and participatory national follow-up
and review mechanisms (9), which enable multi-stakeholder discussions on the progress,
as well as on gaps and prospects for future development. This participatory mechanism
(indicators, Citizens Panel, State and Future of SD –events) is an opportunity to bring
sustainable development related data, trends and challenges into wider public debate
and knowledge. The data gathered from the follow-up and monitoring system was used
when composing this VNR. 
//
In order to prepare an inclusive report that contains views and feedback from peer
countries, Finland invited Mozambique and Switzerland to give comments on the
preparation and content of the report (18). This Peer Dialogue was an opportunity to
exchange good practices as well as to provide comments and recommendations for
further improvement of the report. It also reflects Finland’s participatory process in
preparing the VNR report. A short summary of comments and recommendations from
Mozambique and Switzerland is included in the report, see chapter 4.3. In addition, a
peer learning session was organized between the National Commissions on Sustainable
Development of Finland and Estonia (21). 
//
A Peer Dialogue day with the Governments of Mozambique and Switzerland was held in
26 March 2020. 
We greatly appreciate Finland’s initiative to conduct a peer dialogue and feel honored
to have been invited to discuss and share experiences together with Mozambique. We
consider that the exchange of practices and mutual learning are crucial elements to
advance the 2030 Agenda and accelerate the implementation of the SDGs. 
//
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Finland is characterized by a remarkable
leadership up to the highest political level and benefits from broad public knowledge
and support. The well-established institutional set-up allows for close cooperation
between all relevant government units, among different levels of governance, and with
non-governmental partners. There seems to be a genuine ownership and impressive
commitment for sustainable development in Finland, not just for the sake of elaborating
a VNR. This is very well reflected in the broad-based institutional structures, as well as in
the diversity of initiatives, programmes and projects related to the SDGs. 
//
While the 2030 Agenda is considered a guiding framework by most line ministries
and is integrated into sector strategies accordingly, dealing with trade-offs and policy
incoherencies seems to remain a challenge. Attempts to address these potential
dilemmas often need to be referred to the political level, despite the existence of
well-established cooperation mechanisms. This indicates that policy coherence poses
challenges to all countries – even to those who are best positioned, like Finland – and
needs to be further addressed as a key issue for the successful implementation of the
2030 Agenda. 
//
The approach of not only presenting the Government’s assessment of the SDG
performance but mirroring it with an analysis by civil society is innovative and merits
special attention. It shows a high level of mutual trust and clear interest form the part
of the Government to include other voices. This is something that could be replicated
by other countries and become an international best practice. In this regard, the report
could benefit from a more detailed description of the methodology, including on how
representatives were chosen, what the assessments were based on and how trends
were determined. 
//
The cooperation with non-state actors seems to have been developed very strongly over
the years. While civil society and scientific experts seem much involved, the role of the
private sector in terms of activities and financing for development could be considered
and reflected more broadly. 
//
There is quite a strong focus on environmental aspects which might be linked to
Finland’s goal of carbon neutrality by 2035. While this dimension is considered a priority
18 PUBLICATIONS OF THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE 2020:8 and acted upon by Government and stakeholders, it risks to overshadow some social
and especially economic aspects of sustainable development. Challenges remain in
order to find a balance between all three dimensions of sustainable development and
mainstream them throughout the implementation of all SDGs, including when it comes
to budgeting and means of implementation. 
//
The global responsibility for implementing the SDGs is well reflected in the report,
although it is usually limited to development cooperation. In the interests of broader
policy coherence, it would be relevant to also examine other aspects of international
cooperation (e.g. trade policy) and to focus more specifically on spillovers of domestic
policies on other countries. 
//
The local level, in particular cities, plays a crucial role in sustainable development. Strong
progress by Finnish municipalities can be observed since 2016, even if they do not
always directly link their activities to the SDGs or necessarily label them as such. The
ambition of (larger) cities to take a lead on sustainability aspects shows a lot of potential at national level but also for stronger international cooperation among cities. Finland
could be encouraged to promote this aspect of cooperation even more prominently at
national and international level. 
//
Regarding the statistical annex, it would have been interesting not only to present
the facts, but also to have a more in-depth analysis on the evolution of some specific
indicators. 
//
The first draft of the Finland VNR Report showed a broad horizontal and vertical
participatory process, involving public authorities, civil society, the productive sector,
academia, in addition to international partners. 
//
 The discussion and involvement beyond the governmental are generate an
engagement of different sectors and creates a favourable environment for the country
to act in promoting the 2030 Agenda and in the commitment to the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. 
//
We appreciate positively the new approaches adopted by Finland to ensure
intensification of participation, so that the stakeholder have not only been consulted,
but also given the task of writing parts of the report: The invitation by the Government to several stakeholders (NGOs, cities, business
organizations, Sámi people, Åland and regional authorities) to provide their own
assessments on the progress made as part of the VNR report. As result, some specific
chapters of Finland VNR were written by other stakeholders and Civil Society. The new approaches include the Peer Dialogue with other Member State countries
(Mozambique and Switzerland), which are part of the same process of 2020 VNR, by
asking their contributions to the report.
// 
To ensure the participatory principle that is recommended, out of the above mentioned,
the Finland VNR has been discussed in the meeting of Permanent Secretaries and in the
meeting of the Government. The VNR has also been discussed in an official meeting of
the Committee of the Future in the Parliament, which is so positive from our point of
view. 
//
On the other hand, we also congratulate the Government of Finland of having many
international benchmark studies and indicator reports already in place and the
availability of national statistical reports and evaluations (existing data, recently made
evaluations, researches and reports, which have been made by several independent
bodies like Finnish National Audit Office, national statistical authorities and other
institutions) to be used as evidence for VNR, which makes the Finland VNR more
credible. 
//
We kindly appreciate the Report Structure adopted, especially by incorporating Key
changes / Lessons learned on it, thereby enabling everybody to share what is going on
in Finland as part of implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
//
In understanding that the VNR document circulated for our comments is not the last
version, it is important to call your attention to the need for an ortographic reduction for
the last version. 
// 
Government and all main stakeholders have included the 2030 Agenda into their work
stronger, also citizens have better knowledge on the 2030 Agenda. 
//
The interest of private sector in the 2030 Agenda has increased significantly. This applies
specifically to big companies. Most of the biggest companies have mapped and studied
their actions against SDGs, and many of them have started to integrate SDGs into their
strategies and daily businesses. 
//
In 2016, there were no established mechanisms to maintain the dialogue between the
Government and the Parliament. In four years time, a strong interaction and official
mechanism to enhance the dialogue between the Government and the Parliament
has been built. The Committee for the Future is the Committee responsible of the 2030
Agenda issues in the Parliament. 
//
National Audit Office has integrated the 2030 Agenda into their audit programmes.
The 2030 Agenda Youth Group has become an established practice; young people are
represented in all main institutional setups. 
//
Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development has evolved, and five Green Deals
have been negotiated between the Government and industry sectors. 
//
Keeping up the momentum is important and requires constant work. The members of
the Government and the Parliament change every fourth year, so the new members
have to be updated on the 2030 Agenda at regular intervals. 
//
Government has the overall responsibility for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
in Finland. The Prime Ministers of different Government Coalitions have been leading
the work of the National Commission on Sustainable Development since 1993. The first
national implementation plan for the 2030 Agenda was submitted to the Parliament in
2017 by the Government of the Prime Minister Juha Sipilä. The Government of the Prime
Minister Sanna Marin is currently preparing the second plan. Moreover, both Governments
have engaged in reporting to the United Nations in the form of the Voluntary National
Review, first in 2016 and now again in 2020. Finland is committed to submit its VNR to the
HLPF every four to five years. 
//
All line Ministries are included in the Sustainable Development Coordination Network,
thus enhancing Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development through sectors. All
Ministries have also submitted in four consecutive years their yearly reports to the
Parliament on the policies and measures to achieve the SDGs in their respective policy
branches. 
//
The Finnish Parliament’s Committee for the Future has functioned as the parliamentary
committee responsible for 2030 Agenda matters. The Committee for the Future prepares
parliamentary replies, also known as committee reports on the 2030 Agenda, to the
Government. The Committee also monitors the implementation of the measures required
by Parliament in its reports by issuing resolutions on the Government’s Annual Reports
and budget proposals in relation to the 2030 Agenda themes. Other parliamentary
committees also issue their statements to the Committee for the Future as part of drafting
Parliament’s position on the Government Report on the 2030 Agenda. During the drafting
process, all committees consult with experts and also arrange public consultations
allowing wider participation by stakeholders. Some public consultations have been
arranged as joint meetings of several committees, with a view to contributing to the
policy coherence included in the 2030 Agenda. 
//
The Committee for the Future has also commissioned background reports on various
areas of sustainable development when drafting the committee report on the 2030
Agenda. The Government Reports, Annual Reports and Budgets have provided excellent
tools for building an active and participatory dialogue between the Government and the
Parliament and raising awareness of the 2030 Agenda among Members of Parliament.
Awareness has also been raised by organising ‘morning coffee meetings’ for internal
parliamentary stakeholders to discuss topical issues related to the 2030 Agenda as
part of the Committee for the Future meetings. The Committee for the Future has also
highlighted the objectives and measures specified in the Government Report on the 2030 Agenda and the parliamentary reply in its own statements to other parliamentary
committees in the context of various matters, such as EU technology policy, with a view
to enhancing policy coherence and effectiveness of the 2030 Agenda Action Plan in
Parliament’s legislative work. 
//
Audit offices are globally committed to supporting the 2030 Agenda process by producing
audit information about the subject area. Within its audit mandate, the National Audit
Office of Finland (NAOF) has also adopted sustainable development as a target of
more long-term monitoring efforts. Indeed, Finland’s first Government Action Plan for
implementing the 2030 Agenda (2017) identified NAOF audits as part of the official fouryear monitoring and evaluation cycle. The National Audit Office published an audit report
on the national administrative model for sustainable development in 20191
. Furthermore,
it is currently developing a model for integrating the Sustainable Development Goals as
part of all external auditing, which is also drawing international interest. 
//
Finland has a long tradition in engaging the civil society and other stakeholders in the
sustainable development work. The key mechanism has been the multi-stakeholder
National Commission for Sustainable Development, which has operated continuously for 27 years under Prime Minister’s leadership. The National Commission is an influential
sustainable development forum bringing together key actors in the Finnish society. It is
based on a unique hybrid model, combining high-level political leadership with wideranging participation by civil society and other societal actors. 
//
Minorities, for example the indigenous Sámi people and the Swedish speaking
autonomous region Åland island, have been members of the National Commission
from the beginning. Since 2016, the Commission has been complemented by some
other groups that are at risk of being left behind in national discussions, in particular the
disabled and immigrants. The 2030 Agenda Youth Group was established in 2017 to better
integrate the voice of children and youth to the national implementation. Women groups
have been actively involved from the original Rio Conference in 1992. 
The Commission promotes cooperation in order to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals and strives to integrate the strategic objectives of sustainable development into the
national policy, administration and societal practices. 
//
The Commission was re-appointed for a new four-year term in February 2020. Prime
Minister of Finland, Ms. Sanna Marin is leading the work of the Commission and its 57
members that come from all spheres of the society. 
//
During its new term, the Commission is tasked to speed up the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In addition, it will participate in the
preparation of the National Roadmap of the 2030 Agenda, to be prepared by 2023. The
Roadmap will describe the measures Finland is taking in order to meet the objectives of
the 2030 Agenda and define a schedule for achieving them. The Commission will also
monitor and assess the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Finland. 
//
Another key task of the Commission is to promote, monitor, assess and communicate the
results of the national Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development – The Finland
We Want by 2050. Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development includes a shared
long-term vision, policy principles and objective for the Finnish society to transform into a
sustainable society by 2050. 
//
Another important multistakeholder body that contributes to sustainable development in
Finland is the Development Policy Committee (DPC). It was appointed for the first time in
2003 as an advisory body in relation to Finland’s development policies. The Government
appoints a new Development Policy Committee for each government term. 
//
The most recent term started in January 2020. The Committees key aim is to strengthen
the effectiveness of development policy and to promote discussion on development
policy at national and, in particular, parliamentary levels. All parliamentary parties and key
stakeholders in development policy contexts are represented in the Committee. During
its term of office in 2020–2023, the Committee will focus on Finland as a partner for the
2030 Agenda and for the Paris Agreement on climate change, as well as on safeguarding
continuity in development cooperation. In addition, the Committee continues to promote
policy coherence that supports sustainable development. 
//
In November 2019, the Government issued a Decree on the Development Policy
Committee. The Decree lays down provisions on the purpose, duties, term of office,
membership, Secretariat and decision-making of the Committee. Nowadays, the
Secretariat of the Committee has a permanent status. Since 1 January 2020, it has
operated in connection with the Under-Secretary of State responsible for development
policy and development cooperation at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. 
//
The National Commission on Sustainable Development and the Development Policy
Committee work tightly together in order to enhance coherence between the
implementation measures nationally and in international cooperation. The two bodies
organise joint meetings and workshops. The Secretaries General of both bodies are also
permanent experts in each other’s Commission/Committee. 
//
The first national Expert Panel on Sustainable Development was set up in December 2013
as an experiment of the Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra, which took the role of coordinator.
Seven experts representing different fields of research and expertise were invited to build
a dialogue. The panel found its place as an independent and critical scientific voice in the
Finnish sustainable development policy sphere and created practices for interdisciplinary
dialogue in sustainability issues. It supported the work of the National Commission on
Sustainable Development and exchanged knowledge regularly with the Prime Minister’s
Office. The panel published blogs, discussion papers and a policy brief and conducted a
benchmark study of different science-policy models in sustainability in Europe. 
//
Once the model for science-policy interaction in sustainability issues was created, it
was time to find it a new home. Helsinki Institute of Sustainability Science2, the Natural
Resources Institute Finland (Luke) and the Finnish Environment Institute (SYKE), three
organisations that are all highly engaged in sustainability research and implementation of SDGs, started to host the panel at the beginning of 2019. An open call for nominations
was addressed to Finnish universities, research institutions and knowledge users, and ten
experts were nominated. The panellists are active scientists in the Finnish society. Together
they bring economic, social, technological, ecological and cultural viewpoints as well as a
voice from different regions across Finland to the common pool of the panel. 
//
In its work, the panel promotes societal change that takes into account both the
environment and human wellbeing; identifies issues where contradictory goals
complement and support each other; carries out foresight development and strengthens
long term decision-making. Through a constructive dialogue, the panel acts by
challenging both the policy making and public debate. The panel seeks collaboration
with other science panels of Finland, the Climate Panel and Nature Panel, and joined
the European Network of the Councils of Environmental and Sustainable Development
from the start of 2020 and plans to contribute with its strong interdisciplinary capacity
to related work in the European Environment and Sustainable Development Advisory
Councils (EEAC). 
//
In practice, the panel may participate in debates in which sustainability is discussed:
in parliament or parliamentary committees; within academia, in schools, in open
seminars and workshops; in events organised by private companies and in the media.
During autumn 2019 the panel analysed the future pathways of the Finnish Sustainable
Development Policy using the framework of six entry points and four levers introduced by
the Global Sustainable Development Report (GSDR2019). The work has been led by the
chair of the panel, professor Eeva Furman, who was one of the authors of the GSDR. 
//
Although the main goal of the panel is to support the sustainability transformations
especially in Finland, the panel also acknowledges its global interconnections and
responsibility. International collaboration in both research and policy is a necessary
element, and therefore the panel is committed to acting internationally, sharing Finland’s
experiences and learning from others. 
//
The Agenda 2030 Youth Group was established in 2017 on the initiative of the then
Vice-Chair of the National Commission on Sustainable Development. Young people’s
involvement in implementing sustainable development policy had been found too
limited, to the extent that appointing a single youth delegate for sustainable development
was not enough to address the issue. 
//
To spur the Finnish National Commission on Sustainable Development in its work and
to bring young people’s voices to sustainable development policy processes and public
debate.
//
To inform other young people of the Sustainable Development Goals and themes in
their various networks, such as schools and leisure activities. 
The Agenda 2030 Youth Group consists of 14 members aged 15 to 28, living all over the
country. Group members are selected by Finnish Youth Cooperation Allianssi. The group
started its third term in January 2020.
//
Right from the start, it has been important for the Youth Group to have sufficient
autonomy on what they will do and what matters they will promote. A top-down
agenda and programme will not produce the desired results. The only mandatory and
regular form of activity is attending the meetings of the Finnish National Commission on
Sustainable Development. A group member will always play an official role at Commission
meetings, such as acting as co-chair or a panellist or addressing the meeting. Group
members have felt that this has provided a suitable formal structure to its activities, as
well as an opportunity to bring important themes and messages to the attention of all the
relevant parties involved in sustainable development. 
//
In addition to the Finnish National Commission on Sustainable Development, group
members are also actively involved as speakers and participants in the central
government’s sustainable development policy processes. Whether it is drafting the
Climate Change Act, budgeting for sustainable development, improving communications
about development cooperation or acting as HLPF Youth Delegates, the Agenda 2030
Youth Group provides a suitable way to engage young people in a diverse process of
drafting sustainable development policy. 
//
The group also plays an active role as a participant in public dialogue. Chairs and members
of the Youth Group participate in various stakeholder events, give interviews to the media
and produce content for their social media channels. In the autumn of 2019, for example,
the group created a series of three video clips, where group members interviewed Finnish
Members of the European Parliament on food security, biodiversity and hate speech. 
//
The group’s major achievements lie in climate work. On 2 March 2019, the group
organised Finland’s first youth climate conference, the ‘Our Climate 2030’ event held at
Finlandia Hall, drawing in 500 young Finns from across the country. At the event, the
group also issued the ‘Our Climate 2030’ statement drawn up in cooperation with twenty
civil society organizations (CSOs), which was used in the spring national and European
parliamentary elections. The event itself addressed climate change as a broad theme 
from the perspective of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The event also
attracted plenty of media attention. 
//
The Agenda 2030 Youth Group members feel that setting up the group has improved
young people’s engagement in sustainable development policy. However, they point
out that it is only a small group of young people and, despite their best efforts, its
members have come from fairly homogeneous backgrounds. In other words, they do
not feel that they represent Finnish youth as a whole. They find that the best part of the
group’s existence is the fact that it has brought young people at the centre of sustainable
development decision-making processes, placing them on an equal footing with other
parties as contributors to sustainable development. In 2020, the 2030 Agenda Youth Group
was recognized in the UN Human Rights Council’s report of good practices regarding the right
to a healthy environment. 
//
Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development is one of
Finland’s key instruments for implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. It functions as a long-term
sustainable development strategy for the Finnish society
up until 2050. In addition, it provides an implementation
tool for anyone in Finland who wants to participate in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda with concrete action.
Work on the operational commitments is a unique way to bring together the public sector,
businesses, civil society actors and private individuals. 
//
By making operational commitments, the actors commit themselves to doing their part
in attaining the set objectives. The operational commitments include concrete measures,
changes in operating procedures and innovative trials that promote the shared objectives
and that can be carried out in 1 to 10 years. Through these concrete commitments,
operators can take part in the promotion of all or just some of the shared objectives both
in Finland and globally. By making a commitment, the actors participate in the national
implementation of both, the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and
’Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development – Finland We Want 2050’. All the
commitments are available to the public in the Sitoumus2050.fi online platform. 
//
Operational commitments entail few simple criteria: they should create something new,
be measurable and follow the principles of sustainable development set in the Society’s
Commitment. After publishing the operational commitment, the organisations can invite other organisations to join their commitment. All organisations are also asked to report
regularly on the progress of their operational commitment. 
//
When Finland gave its first VNR in 2016, there were altogether around 300 operational
commitments. Now, in 2020, over 1 000 different organizations and almost 1 500 private
citizens have made their commitment to sustainable development. This includes 130
municipalities, over 400 private companies ranging from small businesses to big, even
multinational companies, and 118 civil society actors. Furthermore, six industrial branches,
Trade, Finance, Media, Energy, Marine and Forest industry, have made comprehensive
industry wide commitments (see case examples below). 
//
A Green Deal is a national voluntary agreement between the State and a body
representing the business and industry sector or e.g. the municipal sector. The aim
is to take joint action to promote the sustainable development goals. Green Deals
seek solutions to matters such as climate change and promoting circular economy in
Finland. The agreements may contribute to better implementation of the legislation or
complement the law. For example, the objectives set in the agreements may be stricter
than in the law or certain objectives may be achieved without further regulation. 
//
The parties to the agreement make a commitment to reach ambitious and monitorable
targets towards achieving environmentally and socially significant impacts. Green Deals
seek outcomes that can be reached in a relatively short term, and the agreement also
sets out the practices to monitor them. Green Deals are not concluded with individual
companies but larger organizations, such as an industry representative. Individual
companies can then join a Green Deal by making a commitment linked to it at the
Sitoums platform.
//
Thus far, there are five Green Deals made; Plastic Bag Deal to decrease usage of plastic bags Automotive Deal to decrease CO2 emissions from traffic and especially new cars. 
Oil Waste Deal to increase recycling of oil waste. 
Construction Machine Deal to switch more electricity based machinery. 
Demolition Waste Deal to increase circular economy in the construction industry. 
//
Nutrition commitment helps and encourages food business operators and stakeholders
to improve the nutritional quality of the Finnish diet and to encourage nutritionally responsible practices. A nutrition commitment can be made in eight different content
areas, such as the amount of salt or sugar, where significant changes should be achieved
under the nutrition recommendations. These are all areas where major service design and
reformulation work is required to improve the dietary habits of the population. 
//
By making Nutrition commitments in the Sitoumus2050fi5 platform, the actors in
the food industry help realizing the nutrition recommendations set by the public
administration. Over 50 different Nutrition commitments have been made, majority of
them by private companies who produce food products but also restaurants and food
markets have made their commitments. 
//
How to get citizens on board? The Sustainable Lifestyles -service6 has been opened in
the context of Sitoumus2050. The Sustainable Lifestyle service
enables Finns to pursue a more sustainable everyday life. Users can first calculate their
personal carbon footprint and then draw up a personal plan to cut the footprint in half by
choosing suitable actions from a list of smart choices. Every individual plan contributes
to the national emissions reduction target and makes every action count. The service is
based on a Lifestyle Test developed by the Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra. After two years
in operation, over 900000 Finns have calculated their own carbon footprints. This adds up
to approximately 20% of the adult population in Finland. Almost 1500 Finns have made a
personal plan in Sitoumus2050 –service to lower their carbon footprint, with an average
commitment of a 22% smaller carbon footprint. All these commitments add up to a
reduction of 2000000 CO2e. The service is publicly accessible through an open source code.
The Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra and the Prime Minister’s Office of Finland are willing to
assist interested partners who would like to adapt the service to their national context. 
//
The Sitoumus2050 tool and platform was evaluated in a Government’s assessment
in 2017. The assessment stated that the Sitoumus2050 -tool is a very effective way to
promote sustainable development in a society. In a survey, 97 % of those who had made
an operational commitment said that the commitment furthers sustainable development
in their work and 92 % said that the commitment helps to become a forerunner in
sustainable development. The evaluation recommended that the platform on operational
commitments needs to be further developed. In addition, the great number of success
stories would deserve to be known more widely. 
//
The 2030 Agenda has provided companies with globally agreed and monitored priorities
for enhancing responsible and sustainable business practices as well as offering them a
crucial role in solving and innovating for global and local sustainability challenges. The
SDGs provide a common language, roadmap and trend chart for companies to adapt to a
world where business–as-usual is no longer an option. 
//
An increasing number of Finnish companies are in the process of integrating SDGs into
their business. After Finland’s first VNR in 2016, the 2030 Agenda has done a breakthrough
in the business sector in Finland. Most of the biggest companies have mapped and
studied their actions against SDGs, and many of them have started to integrate SDGs into
their strategies. Some of the most visionary companies have composed science-based
targets in order to show how they are contributing their part to the SDGs. 
//
If the biggest companies are already familiar with the SDGs, the medium and small-scale
companies are still studying the SDGs and trying to find their own approaches. There are
also numerous companies actively taking action for sustainable development, especially
in the area of climate change mitigation, but without any explicit linkages to the SDGs. 
//
According to an external evaluation (2019, only in Finnish) on Government ownership
steering, the Government resolution on ownership policy has fostered state owned
companies’ CSR work and reporting. According to studies, there is also some positive
correlation between State ownership or association and the level of SDG alignment. The
Government of Finland has been proactive and, for example, the themes of the corporate
responsibility have been included in the Government resolution on ownership policy.
//
Since the previous Finnish VNR in 2016, the number of Finnish companies joining the
UN Global Compact has increased by a rough 55 percent up to 85 members by the end
of 2019, and the number is still increasing. The UN Global Compact Local Network was
officially established in Finland in 2020, although first Finnish companies joined this
global sustainability initiative already back in 2001. Global Compact has offered Finnish
companies platforms and tools to support their work for more sustainable business. There
is a growing interest towards UN Principles, the network and its coming activities. 
//
The FIBS “Sustainability in Finland 2019” survey indicates that the level of attention paid
to the SDGs as part of business operations is still growing: in 2019, more than one half of
large companies already reported taking the SDGs into account in their business, showing
a significant increase on previous years (Figure 2). 
//
In thematic terms, the focus area of sustainable development considered most significant
is climate change. A whopping 87% of corporate executives and experts responding to
the survey reported that climate change was an important or very important focus area
for corporate responsibility (CR) in their organisation over the next 12 months. Climate
change was considered an even more important factor than ethics (79%) and the circular
economy (71%). 
//
Conversely, another global mega-challenge, i.e. the need for biodiversity protection, is not
yet recognised in companies: only 8% of respondents mentioned it as a very important
focus area. 
//
Based on the FIBS survey, companies would like to see legislators provide more back-up
for advancing sustainable development. The majority of respondents (55%) considered
that global challenges should primarily be solved through legislation and international
treaties. 
//
Integrating corporate responsibility into business was perceived as the greatest challenge
for CR management. Measuring and monitoring the impact of corporate responsibility
was considered to be almost as challenging. 
//
A positive development is that companies believe now, more than ever, that the
importance of corporate responsibility and the resources used for that purpose
will increase. Of all the respondents, 93% believe that the importance of corporate
responsibility will grow while 76% think that resources will also increase. 
//
An independent consultant conducted a follow-up assessment on how companies
in Finland are making progress in the integration of SDGs into their business and
sustainability strategies. The aim was to provide an overall picture of where large Finnish
companies are in their SDG integration process as well as to compare the data to the
findings of the previous report. Assessment was based on publicly available information,
and it covered the 120 largest companies in Finland. The assessment results show
some progress between 2018 and 2019 among the Finnish companies in aligning their
businesses with SDGs (Figure3). 
//
The assessment results indicate that the level of SDG alignment among the state owned
companies is higher compared to non-state owned companies. Over one third (35%)
of the 23 assessed majority-owned or state-associated companies had integrated the SDGs into their strategies, and another 35% (8) were in the process of doing it, while the
respective levels among the non-state owned companies were 8% (7) and 19% (17). 
The most prioritized SDGs are SDG8 on decent work, SDG12 on sustainable consumption
and production, and SDG13 on climate action. The SDG5 on gender equality, SDG10 on
reduced inequalities, as well as SDG16 on peace, justice and strong institutions remained
among the less prioritized SDGs, even though these SDGs would be relevant to most
companies. 
//
The VNR 2016 revealed that cities knew only little about the 2030 Agenda. In 2020,
cities work extensively with sustainable development, but not all cities link their work
explicitly with the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Three forerunner cities (Helsinki, Espoo, Turku) have prepared a Voluntary Local Review
(VLR) in 2019 and 2020, and many cities are planning to give their VLR in the future.
Many cities and municipalities have ambitious measures for promoting SDGs and
climate targets. 
//
Åland region has integrated the SDGs into their core strategies. Most of the regional
administrations in Finland have not yet recognized the added value of the SDG
framework. 
//
“On Åland, sustainable development is not a concept – it is our roadmap for going
forward in all policy areas and for all parts of the society. The realization of the Development and Sustainability Agenda for Åland is at the same time the Åland contribution, albeit small, to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. We are convinced that
sub-national governments have a crucial role to play in the implementation of the
SDGs, through projects and programs adapted to the regions’ and its people’s reality.
Åland’s autonomy devolves legislate competence and managing authority, and in our
small society the step between thought and action is short. On behalf of all Ålanders,
the Government of Åland is both happy and proud to contribute to Finland’s VNR and
to take our responsibility in accelerating the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.” 
//
With the understanding that nature constitutes
the foundation of human existence, the Parliament
and the Government of Åland chose (in 2014) to
adopt a goal of total sustainable development in
Åland no later than 2051. A network, created for all
citizens, organizations, authorities and companies,
established the Development and Sustainability
Agenda for Åland. A true bottom-up, inside out
process. The agenda consists of one Vision and
seven Strategic Development Goals for 2030. With
purposeful action in everyone’s daily life, and
in the working practices of all sectors of society,
Åland strive to realize the Vision of the best Åland
we can imagine: Everyone can flourish in a viable
society on the Islands of Peace. 
//
The Network bärkraft.ax is the hub for the coordination of the work to realize the Agenda,
and its mode of operation is transparency and people-centered14. The Development and
Sustainability Council consists of leaders from various sectors and is responsible for the
Network’s vitality and long-term existence. A Status Report with indicators for the seven
strategic development goals identifies progress, challenges and critical success factors
is published annually. The status reports are presented at an annual Forum for Social
Development, to which everyone is invited. Roadmaps for realizing the seven strategic
development goals, containing sub-targets, prioritized measures, timeline and actors
responsible for the implementation are being drafted to be published in 2020. The
Government of Åland does not own this process; it is responsible for acting proactively as
a catalyst and coordinator for the realization of the Agenda. The process of drafting the
regional government’s budget takes into account the Development and Sustainability
Agenda and gives an account of measures that contribute to its realization. 
//
In April 2019, the European Commission awarded Åland Islands and the Development
and Sustanability Agenda for Åland the European Sustainability Award 2019. The Award
Ceremony was held as part of a High-Level Conference in Brussels hosted by the then
First Vice-President of the European Commission, Frans Timmermans, and its Second
Vice-President Jyrki Katainen. The objective of the European Sustainability Award is to
champion initiatives taken for the realization of the global sustainable development goals of the 2030 Agenda. Winners are selected in seven categories, the Åland Islands
and the Agenda for Åland were the winners of the category public bodies under 100.000
individuals. 
//
On Åland, sustainable Development is implemented through a structure facilitating
work over sector boundaries. In this way, healthcare, agriculture, fishing, education,
culture, industry, infrastructure and more can coordinate their efforts despite differing
circumstances. For example, by becoming visible on the larger arenas, Åland can attract
capital and technology. A long-term energy and climate politics is a way to attract
investors in energy and climate actions, since it also provides a security for the investors.
The society scale demo platform Smart Energy Åland is an example. Åland has been
identified as an ideal place to pilot the global energy transition with good wind and solar
conditions, an ambitious climate- and energy strategy as well as a population dedicated
to sustainability. 
//
Trust is an essential element in a
sustainable society. In 2018, the statistics
agency of Åland was tasked to perform a
study on interpersonal trust. The results
showed that the share of the Åland
population with high interpersonal trust
is 63 per cent, and that among youth it is at a higher level compared to corresponding
results in Finland and Sweden. However, if the gap between the poorest and the
wealthiest in society becomes too large there is a risk that trust will be eroded. The
proportion of households on Åland below relative poverty line has increased and gender
equality is lagging behind. Women paid 37% and men 63% of the total amount of the
taxation of earned income and capital income in 2017. The distribution has been the same
since 2001. Men take between 3 and 5 percent of parental leave, which affect pay levels
and pensions, but also broader levels aspects that affect both work and private life. Going
forward, it is of the utmost importance that the Åland society continues to realize its
second strategic development goal, a society where everyone feels trust. 
//
In Åland there is a broad consensus on the importance of a good
water quality; a healthy Baltic Sea, including all of its bays, deep
basins and surface waters. Today, almost all coastal water is
only of moderate quality, and even if all effluents were stopped
immediately it would take 40–50 years before the Baltic Sea was
totally restored. Reduced eutrophication, on Åland and in all
countries in around the Baltic Sea, is the most important aspect
to achieve a good water quality. Åland has both an obligation
and right to be a voice of the Baltic Sea. 
//
Municipalities play a key role in the implementation of the SDGs, as acknowledged
in Finland’s Voluntary National Review 2016. For example, Finnish municipalities are
responsible for the provision of social welfare and health care services and have a
monopoly on statutory land-use planning within their territory. They also offer and
maintain the basic infrastructure (water and waste management, energy supply,
streets) for their citizens and companies. Finnish municipalities have a wide range of
responsibilities and thus lots of possibilities to influence sustainable development. 
//
Sustainable development is at the core of local leadership whatever term is used as
such. In Finland, most municipalities have sustainability related goals as a part of their
strategic processes. SDGs are increasingly becoming a facet for many municipalities to
mirror development. However, the SDGs do not form the starting point for the strategy
or plans for most of the municipalities. SDGs are considered as a useful framework
for communication and outreach activities. Most of the municipalities tend to align
their existing activities and ambitions with the SDGs, rather than using the goals as an
instrument with which to take an outside-in look at existing ambitions, priorities and
solutions. 
//
Climate action and resource-wise strategies, in particular, have ambitious target levels and
a strong strategic role in many Finnish municipalities. 45% of Finns live in a municipality
committed to carbon neutrality by 2030. Another important theme is demographic
change. For the smaller municipalities the issues of existing population and sustainable
shrinkage are important, while for the bigger cities sustainable growth is relevant. These
issues include questions of job creation, transport and mobility management and bring
forth the interconnectedness of diverse sustainability themes. There are also more
common themes, such as inequality and social exclusion – and a sense of community as a
mean to prevent social exclusion. 
//
There is a widespread understanding that the sustainable development needs to be
promoted widely but with operational focus and by supporting the linkages between
themes. Development of sustainable communities – whether the focus is on ecological,
social or economic – takes place on two levels simultaneously: in big solutions that
change structures and through understanding the local everyday life. 
//
Advancement in the local sustainability work can be seen in the networks and increased
ambition level, for example. A cross-sectoral approach is becoming a more common way
of implementing sustainable development. An indication of this is that there are not many
separate strategies for sustainable development. Sustainability is integrated into everyday
actions and leadership as such. 
//
The time spans of local strategic work and the parliamentary term are often too short
when it comes to addressing sustainable development. Local strategies are often set
for only a few years. Tensions experienced in the long-term planning are related to the
different rhythms of governing and politics and the challenge is to overcome this. 
There is room for improvement in the coordination between the national level and the
local level on the specific role of the municipalities in implementing the SDGs. For
example, national indicators seldom serve the purposes of the monitoring of local
sustainability work and there are locally developed indicators and monitoring systems.
However, there are initiatives that create interaction between these governance levels.
The Ministry of the Environment is running the Sustainable City Programme (2019–2023)
that promotes the sustainable development of cities and municipalities through practical
urban development and strategic management. The Nordic study on the forerunner
municipalities implementing SDGs recommends a clearer communication of national
priorities and activities within the 2030 Agenda, guidance on how to work with the SDGs,
and assistance in monitoring progress. Addressing these issues would facilitate local
authority efforts to achieve the SDGs. 
//
According to a recent poll, almost half of Finns (47%)16 know about the 2030 Agenda. 
From 2016 onwards, several initiatives to raise general awareness have been implemented
in good cooperation between the governmental actors, civil society and the private sector. 
Here are few examples. 
//
In 2017 the national film distributor Finnkino screened a catchy short film on the subject
of the SDGs in movie theatres nationwide and achieved a reach of 120000 viewers. 
//
During the European Sustainable Development Week in 2017 and 2019, the Helsinki
Regional Transport Authority partnered with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. During the
week, an animation on the 2030 Agenda was displayed on approximately 1,000 info
screens in trams and the metro. 
//
Public libraries and two major museums participated in the communications on the
2030 Agenda by organising exhibitions showcasing the SDGs in 2017 and 2018.
//
In 2019, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs partnered with three of the top social media
influencers to engage young people in the promotion of sustainable development. In
total 230000 young people were reached through Instagram. The youth statement was
handed out to the Prime Minister and the Minister for Development Cooperation and
Foreign Trade prior to the SDG Summit in 2019. 
//
Global education has a key role in building
commitment towards sustainable
development. The Ministry of Education and
Culture, Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the
Prime Minister’s Office together with the
civil society regularly provide both training
and materials suited for global education
in schools. As an example, the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs has produced a global
education website (maailma2030.fi) in both
national languages (Finnish and Swedish). The site includes information, exercises
and videos and is marketed to teachers at
pedagogical fairs and in regular newsletters. Also SDG posters have been produced and
are distributed free of charge to all the
schools in Finland. 
//
The Government prepared the first national implementation plan in 2017, and the
current Government is at the moment preparing the second implementation plan. 
Implementation plans are submitted to the Parliament as Government Reports. These
Reports form a solid base for dialogue between the Government and the Parliament on
the national implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Sustainable development is incorporated into all phases of the policy cycle: planning,
budgeting and reporting. Challenges remain in ensuring that all the phases of the
policy cycle are interconnected in a systematic way: policy planning should guide the
preparation of the budget, and reporting should clearly indicate how the Government
has succeeded in the allocation of resources into policy areas that promote sustainable
development in a desired manner. 
//
The Government has integrated sustainability aspect to the preparation of state budget
since 2018. 
//
The policy principles on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda that were adopted in
2017 are still applicable and extend over election periods. 
//
Some line ministries have adopted the 2030 Agenda as a guiding framework to their
strategies, but most line Ministries have not yet done so. 
//
Environmental sustainability has been included in policy plans and state budget quite
effectively, but the linkage between the 2030 Agenda and social sustainability has been
more difficult to discover. 
//
The Parliament’s motions have guided the national implementation work. The
Parliament considers important that the Government takes the 2030 Agenda as a
guiding document when formulating Government’s programme and links the 2030
Agenda to all relevant policies and measures. 
//
The 2030 Agenda is the framework for many national strategies, plans and policies.
However, policy coherence for sustainable development remains a challenge, not
only in national context, but also in the context of international and European Union
cooperation. 
//
Trade-offs are often very difficult to reconcile even when identified, as they entail
politically sensitive issues and deep-rooted ideological differences. 
//
Discussion on the importance of the interlinkages has increased. Prime Minister Sanna
Marin’s Government programme is based on a phenomenon based strategic objectives,
which supports cross-sectoral approach. 
//
Finland highlights the role of science and science-policy interface in the sustainable
development discourse. The Expert Panel on Sustainable Development was an
experiment in 2016 but has now become an institutionalized part of national
governance mechanism. 
//
In Finland, the Government is responsible for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda to
the Parliament and, through the national Parliament, to the citizens. Parliament supervises
and reviews the activities of the Government and the administration, thereby ensuring
full accountability. In addition, participation of the Parliament and its many Committees
in the discussion on the state of sustainable development and on the follow-up of the
implementation measures contribute to Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development. 
//
In the Parliamentary Committee Report (7 June 2017), the Parliament of Finland gave
ten strong motions which oblige the Government to take the 2030 Agenda as a guiding
document when formulating Government’s program and to link the 2030 Agenda to all
relevant Government policies and measures. 
//
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda started during the Government term of Prime
Minister Juha Sipilä. Prime Minister Sipilä’s Government program (2015–2019) was
strongly linked to the 2030 Agenda in areas such as the bio-economy, clean technology,
skills and education, and health and well-being. Foreign and security policy underlined
the importance of international stability, peace, democracy, human rights, rule of law
and equality in a world governed by interdependencies, with a view to promoting global
partnerships. From the beginning, it was clear that Finland is committed in advancing the
2030 Agenda as a whole by 2030. 
//
The existing policy and legislative framework and the implementation of international
and national agreements and strategies provided a strong basis for the national
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. National implementation was guided by the
vision of the Government Programme by 2025, and the vision of the Finnish National
Commission on Sustainable Development by 2050. 
//
The 2030 Agenda strongly influenced the present Government’s programme and cuts
across the whole program. The Government led by Prime Minister Sanna Marin (2019–)
aims to transform Finland into a socially, economically and ecologically sustainable society
by 2030. The Government’s Programme is called ‘Inclusive and competent Finland – a
socially, economically and ecologically sustainable society’ and has strong emphasis and
concrete measures that contribute to implementing the 2030 Agenda. Government aims
also to reform political culture and decision-making by making six pledges on policy reforms to Finnish citizens. For example, there is a Pledge for non-discrimination and
Pledge for fair and equal treatment across generations. 
//
To that end, Finland will ensure that Finland is carbon neutral by 2035 and carbon
negative soon after that. Government will carry out a fair and broadly approved transition
to a carbon neutral society and carry out a tax reform for sustainable development to
serve Government’s climate goal. Government aims to halt the decline of biodiversity
and thus achieve the goals of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity. Government
will build sustainable economic growth on a high employment rate (75%) and on strong
public finances. The aim of economic policy is to increase wellbeing and prosperity. 
//
One of the main strategic targets of the PM Sanna Marin’s Government is to raise the level
of education and competence among the population at all levels of education, decrease
differences in learning outcomes, and increase educational equality. Government will
strengthen equality, non-discrimination and equal implementation of rights, as well as
democracy, participation and trust in the institutions of society and raise Finland into a
leading country in gender equality with a special attention to enhancing gender equality
in the working life and in families. Government will shoulder Finland’s global responsibility.
Finland aims at poverty eradication and reduction of inequalities. Finland will strengthen
multilateral cooperation and support the UN reform process. Finland aims to direct 0.7 per
cent of GNI to development cooperation and 0.2 per cent of GNI to the least developed
countries. The Government Programme will be reviewed presumably in the autumn of 2020 due to
effects of the COVID-2019 pandemic. 
//
The Governments of Finland submit the 2030 Agenda implementation plans to the
Parliament as Government Reports. Prime Minister Sipilä’s Report was submitted in 2017
and Prime Minister Marin’s report will be submitted in autumn 2020. 
//
The Government Reports are essential tools for the Governments and Ministries in
informing the national Parliament on the priorities, policies and measures for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. They are also an indispensable instruments for
creating a formal connection and systematic dialogue between the Government and the
Parliament on the state and future of sustainable development in Finland. 
//
However, according to the National Auditor’s Office report conducted in 2019 , the 2017
Report has provided only limited operational guidance for the Ministries. According to the
interviews conducted in the Ministries, there are two reasons why the Government Report
has played only a minor role as a steering document. Firstly, the Report does not contain
any new policy measures and is largely based on the Government Programme and its key
measures (which would have been carried out anyway). Secondly, there are other more
effective instruments in place, in the field of climate and energy policy in particular. 
//
The implementation plan of Prime Minister Juha Sipilä’s Government was based on the
long-term vision, principles and goals set forth in the National Sustainable Development
Strategy (‘Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development – The Future We Want 2050’),
which extends until 2050. 
/
The Government’s plan was submitted to the Parliament as a Government Report in
February 2017. It consisted of a framework for implementation and the follow-up and
review mechanism until 2030. The plan focused on two key areas, where specific measures
were taken: 1) a carbon-neutral and resource-wise Finland; and 2) a non-discriminatory,
equal and competent Finland. The implementation was based on three policy principles:
long-term action and transformation; policy coherence and global partnership; and
ownership and participation (Figure 4). 
//
During Prime Minister Sipilä’s Government term, development policy included four
priority areas and they were linked to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda: 1)
gender equality and the empowerment of girls and women; 2) supporting economies in
developing countries in creating jobs, sources of livelihood and well-being; 3) democratic
and functioning societies; better food security and access to water and energy; and 4)
sustainability of natural resources. It was moreover emphasized that development
policy is an integral part of Finland’s foreign and security policy.
//
Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government was due to give the implementation plan as
a Government Report to the Parliament in April 2020, but because of the COVID-2019
pandemic the plan is postponed to autumn 2020. The Implementation Plan will
include Government’s commitment to implement the 2030 Agenda, apply the policy
principles, and reinforce the follow-up and review mechanisms, organization models and
Government’s actions. 
//
The Plan will be build on Government’s program ‘Inclusive and competent Finland – a
socially, economically and ecologically sustainable society’ and on Finland’s long-term
tradition to involve and engage societal actors in the implementation of sustainable
development. For the first time, the Report will highlight the Government’s measures for
each of the SDG. 
//
Long-term planning beyond the Government terms has always been one of the strengths
of the Finnish sustainable development policy-making. This will be featured also in
the Report of Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government. The Report will continue to
implement the policy principles of the previous Government that called for long-term
planning, policy coherence, transformation, global partnership, inclusiveness and
participation. It also continues and strengthens the measures of the previous Government
in ensuring robust follow-up and regular review of the national implementation. 
//
In addition, Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government is committed to renew the political
culture and strengthen the trust of citizens in the democratic decision-making. To that end,
the Government has given six pledges to citizens on policy reforms that are very much in
line with the policy principles of the Finnish sustainable development policy-making. 
//
The 2030 Agenda has been incorporated into Government’s planning, budgeting and
reporting processes with varying degree of success. 
On a yearly basis, all line ministries in Finland are required to compile their policies and
measures on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda into Government’s Annual Report
to the Parliament. So far, the Parliament has received four such reports: in 2017, 2018,
2019 and 2020. 
//
According to the National Audit Office report, the Government Annual Reports have
provided a comprehensive summary of the yearly policies and measures for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Finland, compiling key areas, key actions and
actors. The Annual Reports have also served as important sources of information on
sustainable development achievements to interested stakeholders, media, citizens and
international community. On the other hand, Annual Reports on the implementation have
been rather descriptive and entailed only little quantitative measures. 
//
The Government Annual Reports have been valuable tools for the Government officials in
mainstreaming the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and ensuring political support. 
The Annual Reports have given support to the sustainable development coordinators
of each line Ministry and legitimized their work for the 2030 Agenda. In particular, the
Reports have been pivotal in facilitating the dialogue between the Government and the
Parliament. 
//
In addition to the Annual Reports, Ministries are requested to include information
essential to the promotion and monitoring of sustainable development in their yearly
budget planning, as well as in their follow-up indicators. Several procedures, which
vary from one ministry to another, are in place for identifying trade-offs and synergies. 
However, it is recognized that trade-offs are often very difficult to reconcile even
when identified, as they entail politically sensitive issues and deep-rooted ideological
differences. Many of the conflicts are therefore addressed at the political (ministerial) level. 
//
In recent years, Finland has aimed to gradually improve the transparency of sustainable
development in the State Budget by incorporating sustainable development as an
integral part of its drafting process. 
//
The 2018 drafting process was the first time that the budget proposal included language
on sustainable development from each administrative branch. In their contributions,
each administrative branch provided details about measures related to sustainable
development and key changes in the relevant appropriations included in the budget
proposal. These texts covered all of the key Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
//
In the 2019 budget proposal, sustainable development budgeting was extended beyond
the above-mentioned sectoral perspective to also include a completely new chapter
entitled ‘Sustainable development’ in the General Strategy and Outlook section, which took a more holistic view on sustainable development, especially from the perspective of
the SDGs relevant to carbon neutrality. An equivalent analysis is also included in the 2020
budget proposal. 
//
The budget proposal’s chapter on sustainable development discusses which specific
appropriations should be used to advance the carbon neutrality goals. The identified
appropriations will promote aspects such as biodiversity and the wellbeing of nature and
the environment, reduce emissions, advance bioeconomy solutions and develop Finland
towards a low-carbon society. 
//
The chapter also examines the types of taxes included in the budget proposal that are
relevant to the carbon neutrality target. These especially include energy taxes, vehicle tax,
car tax, waste tax and excise duty on certain beverage containers. 
//
In order to provide a transparent overview of the package of measures relating to carbon
neutrality, the budget proposal’s General Strategy and Outlook section also discusses
environmentally harmful subsidies. These refer to subsidies that result in an increase in the
utilisation of natural resources and the environmental burden in the subsidised enterprise
or the subsidised sector. The rationale for these harmful subsidies and their introduction
is based on non-environmental considerations. In other words, environmentally harmful
subsidies may have positive effects in terms of other policy objectives, such as enhancing
local livelihoods and income opportunities. The environmentally harmful subsidies
discussed in the chapter are based on prior studies conducted in Finland. 
//

In its Programme, Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government is committed to developing
sustainable development budgeting. This means that sustainable development budgeting
will continue and its development measures are currently being considered. 
//
From the outset, one of the principles of development was to progress gradually, increasing
information step by step and partly on an experimental basis while assessing which model
would work best for Finland. This gradual approach has made it possible to review the
sustainable development budget with quite limited administrative resources. However, it
is still too early to assess its impact. Nevertheless, it is already fair to say that the process
has raised awareness about sustainable development issues, increased the transparency
of budget proposals and helped outline the appropriations included in the proposals as
a whole. Sustainable development budgeting has been specifically carried out under the
leadership of the Ministry of Finance working in cooperation with other ministries. One
of the key aspects of this work has involved cooperation between budget drafters and
sustainable development experts. Parliament has also taken a favourable position on
sustainable development budgeting. The early stages of the development process also
involved a broader consultation with stakeholders, including civil society actors. 
//
The line ministries have started to integrate the SDGs into sectoral policies and strategies,
as well as to their guidance and performance agreements with the governmental
institutes and offices. This is in line with the Parliament’s motion to incorporate the 2030
Agenda into Government’s all main guiding documents. 
//
In 2019, the National Audit Office of Finland conducted an audit23 on the promotion
of sustainable development in Finland. According to the Report, Ministries attach
now greater importance to sustainable development and, in a number of ministries,
sustainable development has become the basis for their strategy or a strategic objective. 
The SDGs are often used as a benchmark for the Ministries’ own activities. The Ministries
have identified and specified functions that help to implement the SDGs. They have also
established or strengthened internal coordination networks for sustainable development,
the task of which is to draw the attention of Ministries’ departments and units to
sustainable development. There are, however, substantial differences between Ministries
concerning the status of the 2030 Agenda coordinators and coordination networks. 
//
Even though sustainable development has become more prominent in the Ministries’
strategies and work, the Auditors’ Report underlines that the more analytical assessment
on the ecological, economic or social sustainability of the policy content is still
missing. Furthermore, the policy principles of sustainable development, such as global
responsibility and long-term action, have not been analyzed. In fact, incorporating
sustainable development into Ministries’ work has mostly been a matter of adopting
sustainable development objectives (usually some of the SDGs) as Ministries’ own
objectives. There is still no clear or coordinated connection between sustainable
development and the content of policy preparation in individual Ministries.  
//
In the 11 ministries included in the Audit, sustainable development was infrequently
mentioned and only occasional references were found in performance management
documents. One such reference was found in the performance agreement template of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry for the period 2019–2023. It contained a separate subchapter, in which the units subject to steering were asked to define themselves how their
activities supported Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations. 
//
The National Commission on Sustainable Development has been responsible for
designing, preparing and compiling the National Strategies for Sustainable Development
in Finland. First such strategy was formulated in 2006. The present strategy ‘Society’s
Commitment to Sustainable Development – The Finland we want by 2050’ was adopted in
2014, a year before the adoption of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
In 2016 the Commission decided not to redraft the existing strategy, but to update the
key objectives and principles to be in line with the 2030 Agenda (Figure 5). It collects and
represents the views on key national objectives and themes for sustainable development
from a broad range of Finland’s societal actors. It also provides a common vision for the
society: “A prosperous Finland with global responsibility for sustainability and the carrying
capacity of nature”. 
//
Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development serves as a long-term target
framework for the Finnish society, and a tool in promoting Policy Coherence for
Sustainable Development and facilitating concrete implementation by various
administrative sectors and societal actors. 
//
Society’s Commitment to Sustainable Development formed the basis for the
Government’s first Implementation Plan for the 2030 Agenda in 2017. The Government
adopted the vision and principles of the Society’s Commitment, which enabled
building coherence and trust between the Government and the broader society on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Finland. 
//
However, the National Audit (2019) and the independent assessment (POLKU, 2019)
on sustainable development revealed that the Society’s Commitment has not sufficiently
steered Ministries work. Also, many larger companies have taken the SDG framework
for their compass, whereas the national strategy and its eight objectives have remained
obsolete. In terms of communication, the 2030 Agenda has been more attractive than
the national Society’s Commitment. Having two policy frameworks for sustainable
development, much as they are interlinked, has created some confusion among
stakeholders. It remains to be seen what the future of the Society’s Commitment will be. In
any case it is likely that the National Commission on Sustainable Development will update
or renew the national strategy during the Commission’s new term 2020–2023. 
//
Government’s roadmap for research, development and innovation (RDI) paves the way
towards sustainable growth and wellbeing through high-level knowledge, research
and innovation. The roadmap identifies the pivotal role of research and innovation in
creating solutions to the global development challenges identified in the 2030 Agenda. 
The policy interventions will be focused on developing the knowledge base, increasing
RDI cooperation between research organisations, businesses and third sector and
innovativeness of public sector. Knowledge, research and innovation are also seen as a key
in mitigating the societal effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
//
Many concrete steps towards integrating SDGs in research and innovation policies,
instruments and activities have been taken. Main public funding organisations for
research and innovation, Business Finland and Academy of Finland, have integrated
Sustainable Development Goals into their programmes to yield knowledge and solutions
to the SDG challenges. Scaling up innovations for international markets will be boosted
via programmes by Business Finland (Figure 6) and VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland Ltd, relating to themes such as clean energy, renewable raw materials, the circular
economy, health, and digitalisation. Academy of Finland enhances the achievement
of SDG goals through annual open calls and by funding cutting edge research. Higher
education institutions and public research institutions are increasingly regarding
sustainable development as part of their strategy and focus of research. In 2018, for
example, the University of Helsinki established the Helsinki Institute of Sustainability
Science (HELSUS), which contributes to the sustainable transformation of the society by
means of inter-disciplinary and transdisciplinary research and education. 
//
Finland promotes cooperation and coherence between research and innovation and
development policies. Finnish innovation policy also supports industries, such as mining,
tourism, space, industrial and health sectors, in the transition toward sustainable growth.
Finland also utilizes the funding from the EU Framework Programme to finance RDI
activities focusing on solving the sustainability challenges. 
//
Finnish education policy aims to offer equal opportunities for education for all. Publicly
funded education is free of charge in Finland from early childhood education and care
(ECEC) through to higher education. 
//
Education is never isolated from the rest of society. Sustainable development is being
promoted holistically in all fields of activity falling within the mandate of the Ministry of
Education and Culture – education and training, culture, science, youth, and sports and
physical activity – by means of information, legislative, performance and target guidance. 
According to the Ministry’s 2018 Futures Review, a competent Finland wants to bear its
share of responsibility for solving global problems and meet the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Competence provides the best safeguard amidst technological and global
change. Furthermore, one of the key objectives set out in the Ministry’s 2019 strategy
document, entitled Championing education and culture with knowledge, skills and feeling,
is to strengthen sustainable development, sustainable growth and vitality in Finland. 
//
In April 2020, the Sustainable Development Policy of the Ministry of Education and
Culture and its administrative branch26 was published. The policy supports the Ministry’s
administrative branch in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the rationale being
that achieving the goals of the Agenda require strong support of education, research,
cultural, youth and sport policies. Measures taken in the Ministry’s administrative
branch as a whole promote a cultural change, which is a prerequisite for a shift towards
comprehensive sustainable development. This refers, for example, to consolidating and
maintaining equal rights to cultural engagement, high standards of early childhood
education and care, high level of education, up-to-date skills, continuous learning, and
accessibility of information. 
//
Finland’s current Government Programme (2019–) is premised on an economically,
ecologically and socially sustainable society built on competence and inclusion. Finland’s
prosperity is based on growth resting on education, research and innovation. People’s
strong basic skills and capabilities to learn new things and upgrade their competence
throughout their lives and careers play a key role amidst the transformation of the world
of work. 
//
In the section of its Programme entitled ‘Finland that promotes competence,
education, culture and innovation’, the Government has specified the following
objectives: the level of education and competence among the population will rise at all levels of
education, differences in learning outcomes will decrease, and educational equality will
increase; children and young people will feel well; education and training will enhance gender equality and non-discrimination in society;
and Finland will be an internationally attractive place to study, conduct research and invest. 
//
Finland has developed education and training at all levels with due attention to increasing
wellbeing and community spirit. Emphasis is also placed on a competence approach, such
as learning and problem-solving skills, multiliteracy, and creative and critical thinking. 
In the future, everyone should have the capacity to engage in lifelong and continuous
learning, including at the workplace. Development of continuous learning is based on
working methods and conceptualisation geared towards meeting the demand from
society and businesses. 
//
In the Finnish context, the holistic approach towards sustainable development in
schools and other educational institutions means that learning environments, everyday
organisational culture and school management and leadership are also targets of
continuous improvement alongside learning contents. Sustainable development is
already effectively captured in learning contents within documents such as the National
Core Curricula for early childhood education and care, basic education and vocational
education and training. However, there is still work to be done to encourage more
widespread adoption of a holistic organisational culture, among other things. 
//
Through their operations, universities and universities of applied sciences promote
Finnish competitiveness, wellbeing, all-round education and culture, and sustainable
development. These higher education institutions are autonomous entities, which
are responsible for their own administration, research and teaching. Several higher
education institutions have worked systematically to integrate sustainable development
into different fields of study. Many also offer transdisciplinary minor subject modules in
sustainable development. The aim is to create solutions to the challenge presented by
sustainable development and to provide students with the kind of competence capital
required on the labour market. 
//
Teacher education and its development form one of the key functions of higher education
institutions. Teachers are highly educated and valued professionals in Finland. In 2016,
the Ministry of Education and Culture appointed a Teacher Education Forum made up
of relevant stakeholders, which has drafted national guidelines for developing teacher
education. Finland places emphasis on cooperation between teachers and the continuum
between teachers’ pre-service education, induction training and continuing professional
development. Teachers’ digital skills and use of innovative teaching methods have also
been consolidated through a network of teacher tutors. 
//
In recent years, one of the priorities of education policy has focused on students’ flexible
learning pathways based on a ‘leave no-one behind’ approach. This means an education
system with no progress-hindering dead ends from early childhood education and care
through to higher education. Students can move from vocational programmes to higher
education, and vice versa, with prior learning recognised to the fullest possible extent. At
the same time, pathways to higher education are being diversified, while also improving
its pass rates and developing an operating model and conceptualised provision for
continuous learning. 
//
The latest examples of developing flexible learning pathways include the reform of
vocational education and training and the new Vocational Education and Training Act
(531/2017), in force as of the beginning of 2018. Under the new system, it is possible
to flexibly apply for vocational education and training through a rolling application
procedure where necessary. Each student is provided with a personal study plan and
they can complete an entire vocational qualification or individual qualification modules
according to their own needs. There are also preparatory education and competence
development programmes on offer. Competence is assessed against the qualification
requirements for vocational skills and competencies, irrespective of how, where and
when these were acquired. Competence, including sustainable development skills, is
demonstrated by performing practical work tasks in real-life work situations. The reform
abolished the distinction between vocational programmes intended for young people
and adults. 
//
Education is digitalising. This entails, for example, increasing the modularity of higher
education, digital course provision and guidance counselling services, and modernising
pedagogical methods. These reforms will serve degree education and continuous learning. 
The number of digital courses and fully digital degree programmes will be increased in
order to improve accessibility and expand international student recruitment. 
//
The contributions of liberal adult education – including folk high schools, adult education
centres, study centres, sports institutes and summer universities – are also important in
Finland. Based on the principle of lifelong learning, its purpose is to promote people’s
diverse personal development and wellbeing, advance sustainable development, and
provide education in support of social coherence, equality and active citizenship. A
number of CSOs operating in educational, cultural, youth, sports and physical activity
sectors also play a significant role. They produce learning materials and provide training
in sustainable development issues both within schools and liberal adult education
institutions and outside as part of their core activities. 
//
According to various reports produced in Finland in relation to the progress made in
promoting sustainable development (such as the PATH2030 project in 2017–2018),
challenges requiring special attention include increasing social exclusion, combating
climate change, deteriorating environmental status, and unsustainable consumer habits. 
Meeting these challenges calls for themes relating to educational responsibility and
quality improvement. 
//
A specific concern is that young people’s level of education is no longer rising. Every year,
about 15% of young people are left without an upper secondary certificate. This means
that, after comprehensive school, one out of nine young people lacks the capabilities
required to pursue further studies and find employment. The situation increases the risk of social exclusion, just like the growth in learning differences between both genders and
regions. Moreover, even second-generation immigrants have lower learning outcomes
when compared with the mainstream population. The flexibility of education and
training is placed at the centre of measures, as are the efforts to increase wellbeing and
community spirit. Education and training providers also receive discretionary government
grants, which were extended in 2019 to cover early childhood education and care. The
grants can be used to hire more teachers and classroom assistants in order to reduce
teaching group sizes in schools that require additional support. Furthermore, special
efforts are made to encourage boys to take up reading for pleasure. 
//
In 2018, 41% of the 25–34 age group had completed a higher education degree. By
international standards, this figure places Finland around the EU average and below the
OECD average. Consequently, the Government Programme and the Vision for Higher
Education and Research in 2030 have set a target for 50% of the 25–34 age group to
complete a higher education degree by 2030. 
//
Participation in adult education in Finland is at a high level by international standards, standing
at over one half of adults. However, the problem is that participation is unevenly distributed.
The better the educational attainment level, labour-market position or socio-economic status
that an individual has, the likelier it is for them to participate in adult education. 
//
Prevention of bullying, harassment and hate speech has been addressed in education
and training in many different ways, such as inter-sectoral cooperation, including nonformal learning contexts. The same goes for young people’s social exclusion. The number
of young people not in employment, education or training (NEETs) has decreased in
recent years, but it is still over 10% of the age cohort. Attention should be paid to the
diversification of society, and the need to prevent the polarisation trend should be met by
means of education and research. 
//
Stepping up efforts to combat climate change is quite a topical theme in education,
training and research as well. In 2019, the Finnish National Agency for Education launched
an awareness-raising programme entitled ‘Climate Responsibility in Education’ to
strengthen the means to support learning about climate responsibility. Several higher
education institutions participate in the Times Higher Education SDG ranking, which
measures their success in delivering the Sustainable Development Goals. Finnish CSOs
also provide global education that increasingly focuses on climate change and on
enhancing the opportunities of civil society to exercise influence. 
//
The four priority areas in Finland’s development policy are: 1. Women and Girls; 2. 
Sustainable Economies and Decent jobs; 3. Education and Democratic Societies; and 4. 
Climate Resilience and Natural Resources. The policy priorities are defined in terms of their
contribution to the sustainable development goals (SDGs). 
//
Since 2016, several steps have been taken to deepen and clarify the integration of the
2030 Agenda in Finland’s development cooperation. The Government Programme 2019
is a landmark document in this regard. Finland presented its first comprehensive results
report to the Parliament in 2018, which showed that through its development policy
and development cooperation, Finland has contributed to addressing the most serious
development challenges in its priority areas. In 2022 the Government will present a
second comprehensive results report on Finland’s Development Policy to the Parliament. 
The new monitoring tools in place for tracking implementation will allow Finland to
show more clearly how its development cooperation supports the 2030 Agenda. All
programmes and projects that Finland supports are encouraged to consider the use of
SDG indicators for their monitoring. 
//
Finland has actively promoted international policy discussions on the integration of the
2030 Agenda to results based management of development cooperation. One highlight
was the adoption of the Guiding Principles on Management for Sustainable Development
Results by the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) in 2019. Finland has
integrated the 2030 Agenda into its guidelines for civil society in development policy
(2017) and its funding instruments for civil society, including application criteria and
reporting requirements. 
//
The 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) are integrated in
the European Consensus on Development (2017). The 2030 Agenda is the overall and
leading policy framework for the main EU development policy processes such as external
financing in the next EU Multiannual Financial Framework, EU development policy
programming and the negotiations for the new Partnership between the EU and the
African, Caribbean and Pacific countries after 2020.
// 
Finland has promoted the 2030 Agenda as the overall framework in the ongoing
negotiations on the EU’s future financing of external relations, the Regulation Establishing
the EU Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument (NDICI).
Finland has, in particular, promoted the mainstreaming of SDG 5 (Gender equality) and 13
(Climate action) in the regulation. In addition, Finland has emphasised mainstreaming of
the aforementioned SDGs when programming the next financial period (2021–2027). 
//
The promotion of human rights, the rule of law, democracy, peace, freedom, and
equality in all international activities forms the central element of the value base on
which Finland’s foreign and security policy rests. It is based on good bilateral relations,
an active role within the European Union, and effective multilateral cooperation and
promotion of rules-based international system. Finland continues to work actively towards
strengthening the UN and its ability to operate effectively towards implementation of the
2030 Agenda while taking into account international law, democracy and human rights. 
//
Finland promotes the functioning and independence of the UN Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Office of the Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the human
rights monitoring mechanisms as well as contributes to the resources. The rights of
women and girls, indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities are among the key
thematic priorities of Finland’s international human rights policy. Finland is a candidate to
the UN Human Rights Council for the term 2022–2024. The Human Rights Council is one of
the cornerstones of the multilateral system. 
//
Finland’s foreign and security policy emphasises strengthening gender equality and
the rights of women and girls, reducing inequalities, tackling climate change and its
impacts, promoting peaceful societies, guaranteeing legal services for all, and effective
and responsible institutions. During Finland’s Presidency of the European Union (2019),
Finland actively promoted the mainstreaming of human rights defenders, women and
girls and LHBTI rights in various sectors of the EU’s foreign and security policy. As President
of the Council of Europe (2019) Finland took initiatives to increase the institution’s
effectiveness and promotion of the rule of law, and promoted action on human rights
-centred artificial intelligence. 
//
International crisis management is an integral part of Finland’s foreign, security and
defence policy. Finland strongly promotes and contributes with a wide variety of tools
to international peace and stability. Finland’s foreign and security policy objectives and
related activities are strongly in line with the attainment of the universal goals and targets
of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Finland’s participation in international crisis management is based on the national
foreign and security policy priorities. By participating in international crisis management
Finland promotes democracy, good governance and human rights, including protection
of civilians, preventing sexual violence in conflicts as well as the rights of women and
children. Mitigating climate change is an overarching principle that is taken into account
in all policies and activities. Finland is a strong proponent of a comprehensive approach in
crisis management. Enhancing security and stability as well as strengthening capabilities
and capacity of conflict driven countries is essential. Participation of women and youth in
peace processes, including in crisis management activities, is a priority for Finland. 
//
Finland is a strong supporter of the Women, Peace and Security agenda, the
implementation of which contributes to the realisation of the 2030 Agenda. The key
in our third National 1325 Action Plan (2018–2021) is to ensure women’s meaningful
participation and mainstream the gender perspective better in all sectors. Participation of
the civil society at all stages is essential. 
//
Finland will prepare, as the first country in the world, a National Action Plan (NAP) on the
implementation of the UN Resolution 2250 on Youth, Peace and Security. 
The 2030 Agenda and especially target 16.4, explicitly reflects upon the importance of
arms control in promoting peace, security and sustainable development. Finland actively
supports this work especially through humanitarian mine action, control of illicit small
arms and light weapons and regulating the international arms trade. 
//
The 2030 Agenda objectives have been integrated into the EU’s and Finland’s trade
policy. As a member of the EU, Finland exercises its trade policy through the EU. The 2030
Agenda recongises that international trade is a driver for inclusive economic growth and
poverty reduction, and contributes to the promotion of sustainable development. It
also highlights the importance of continuing to promote a universal, rules-based, open,
transparent, predictable, inclusive, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading
system under the WTO, as well as meaningful trade liberalisation. These objectives are fully
in line with Finland’s trade policy. 
//
The EU has already for a number of years provided duty-free and quota-free market
access to imports from the least developed countries, LDCs (SDG targets 10.A.1 and
17.12.1.). Finland has supported this provision of duty-free and quota-free market access
for the LDCs. Finland also supports the target of significantly increasing the exports of
developing countries, in particular those of the LDCs (target 17.11.).
//
In accessing EU markets, the challenge of LDCs is not that of lack of market access, but lack
of trade capacity. Therefore, Finland has been a strong supporter of the international Aid
for Trade initiative since 2005, which aims at providing more trade-related development
assistance to developing countries. 
//
With regard to SDG target 14.6 on fisheries subsidies and illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, the EU has actively taken part in the WTO negotiations on fisheries
subsidies reform and Finland has supported the work as part of the EU. 
//
According to PATH2030 evaluation, opportunities to promote the sustainable
development work of all administrative branches in foreign policy are exceptionally
good in Finland. In practice, the mainstreaming of the human rights based approach 
and broad-based foreign policy in sustainable development still needs a great deal of
work and the resources required to carry out this work. Evaluation underlines the need
for a credible plan and broad-based commitment to increase development cooperation
appropriations to 0.7 per cent of the GNP. The Finnish model includes strong support for
a rules-based system, which should also, in practice, be seen as strong support for UN
organisations and high-profile work within the UN. 
//
Finland is a member of the European Union. Since all EU member states have delegated
competencies in some policy areas from member states to the Union, and since common
EU legislation and policies have a significant impact on national decision making and
legislation, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the achievement of the SDG’s at
country level depend significantly on the decisions made at the EU level. 
//
Finland has urged the Union to ambitiously promote the 2030 Agenda. In 2017, the
Council established a working party on the 2030 Agenda, whose mandate is to assist
the Council to regularly follow up, monitor and review the EU internal and external
implementation of the 2030 Agenda across policy sectors at the EU level, and to ensure
that follow-up, monitoring and review is done in a systematic, effective, participatory
transparent and integrated manner; address overarching cross-cutting issues related to
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and take stock of progress made at EU level; and
play a leading role in the coordination and preparation of common EU approaches and
positions in view of relevant international dialogues, processes and fora on sustainable
development. 
//
In 2019 the Council concluded that the main policy foundations for a sustainable future
in Europe include a decisive transition towards a circular economy, including non-toxic
material cycles; striving for climate neutrality and tackling climate change in line with the
Paris Agreement; protecting and restoring biodiversity and ecosystems; the sustainability
of the agriculture and food systems; as well as safe and sustainable low carbon energy,
buildings and mobility sectors; whilst fostering European cohesion. The Council
underlined the need to strengthen the social dimension to promote inclusion; equality in
all its forms, notably gender equality; high-quality and inclusive education; and a socially
fair transition, in line with the European Pillar of Social Rights, while ensuring that the
EU’s common values, including democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights are
safeguarded.
// 
In 2019 the Council also agreed on the EU’s Strategic Agenda for 2019–2024. It is
intended to guide the work of the Institutions in the next five years. It focuses on four
main priorities: 1) protecting citizens and freedoms; 2) developing a strong and vibrant
economic base; 3) building a climate-neutral, green, fair and social Europe; and 4)
promoting European interests and values on the global stage. 
//
The strategic agenda of the Council guided the President of the new Commission in the
preparation of Commission’s Political Guidelines. The Political Guidelines focus on six
headline ambitions for Europe over the next five years and well beyond: A European
Green Deal; An economy that works for people; A Europe fit for the digital age; Promoting 
our European way of life; A stronger Europe in the world; A new push for European
democracy. These headline ambitions are well in line with the Finnish priorities and the
2030 Agenda. 
//
Furthermore, in 2019, a Resolution of the Council on the Cultural Dimension of
Sustainable Development was prepared. The resolution emphasizes the responsibility of
all policy areas, including culture, in achieving the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.
The resolution asks the Commission to prepare, together with the Member States, an
EU Action Plan on the cultural dimension of sustainable development and integrate the
action plan in the EU’s implementation strategy for the 2030 Agenda. Finland supports
consistently the strengthening of the cultural dimension of sustainable development in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Nordic Countries are a central reference group for Finland, and sustainability work done
in the framework of Nordic Council of Ministers complements the national sustainability
work of Finland. Since 2017, the framework for joint Nordic work around the 2030 Agenda
has been Generation 2030 -programme. It has three main objectives: 1) ensure that the
work of the Nordic Council of Ministers contributes to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda by way of political focus and relevant projects; 2) contribute to involvement in and
knowledge sharing related to the 2030 Agenda in the Nordic Region; and 3) improve the
visibility of the Nordic Council of Ministers’ work in the Nordic Region and internationally. 
//
In August 2019 the Nordic Prime Ministers adopted a new Nordic vision for 2030. The
vision aims at making the Nordic region the most sustainable and integrated region in
the world by 2030. The vision consists of three strategic priorities: a green Nordic region;
a competitive Nordic region, and a socially sustainable Nordic Region. These priorities will
guide the work of the Nordic Council of Ministers up to 2024. 
//
Sustainable development seeks to combine greater economic prosperity and social justice
with a healthy environment, in order to improve the overall wellbeing and stability of
society. The challenge has been the ambiguity of the concept ‘sustainable development’,
being sometimes too vague and abstract, sometimes too “development” or too
“environment”, many times “everything but nothing”. 
//
That is why it has been important in Finland to concretize, visualize and operationalize
sustainable development and its three dimensions by developing related concepts, tools and indicators, sustainable development strategies and multi-stakeholder forums, as well
as public-private partnerships and networks. 
//
The most recent academic tool to help grasp the multidimensional and interlinked nature
of sustainable development has been the “sustainable development doughnut” designed
by Kate Raworth, based on and extended from the work of eminent researches of the
Stockholm Resilient Centre. The doughnut has been helpful in Finland to visualize the dual
challenge of reaching the social foundation (social and societal goals) but at the same
time ensuring that the environmental ceiling (planetary boundaries) is not exceeded. In
that safe and just space for humanity (doughnut) can economic development be inclusive
and sustainable. The doughnut not only describes the three dimensions of sustainable
development, but also highlights the global nature of our common efforts. This is
sometimes forgotten in national deliberations. 
//
The ‘Doughnut economy’ (Figure 7) has inspired Finland’s strategic thinking to the extent
that it was taken as the basis for Finland’s national strategy for sustainable development
‘Society’s Commitment on Sustainable Development – the Finland we want 2050’. The
vision of the Society’s Commitment recognizes the planetary boundaries and our global
responsibility while at the same time ensuring further development of the Nordic welfare
society and wellbeing of Finnish citizens. 
//
The theme of HLPF 2020 ‘Accelerated action and transformative pathways: realizing the
decade of action and delivery for sustainable development’ implies that after almost
5 years of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda we need to be able to deliver results
and progress. We need to demonstrate our commitment to accelerated action and
transformative change. Transformative change does not happen by business-as-usual
methods and tools. 
//
The value added of the 2030 Agenda lies in its comprehensiveness and
interconnectedness. For example, economic growth needs to benefit the people and
planet. Environment policies and climate action need to improve peoples’ health and
wellbeing and create new prosperity and jobs. Poverty eradication and wellbeing of
people need to be created without harming the environment and economic development. 
//
Universal social security and service systems, as well as good educational opportunities
for the entire population, have prevented exclusion. 
//
Guaranteeing employment for as many as possible has been challenging, long-term
unemployment is a problem. 
//
Finland finds it important to take care of all the population groups and the cohesiveness
of society. Individual approach has been successful in meeting people’s needs. 
//
Persons belonging to visible minorities and persons with disabilities continue to
experience discrimination in different areas of life. National legislation and policy
actions promoting equality and preventing exclusion aim to ensure equal opportunities
for all. 
//
It is important to increase the disaggregation of information by disability, age and origin 
In the global implementation of the 2030 Agenda Finland focuses on four priority
areas: 1. Women and Girls, 2. Sustainable Economies and Decent jobs, 3. Education and
Democratic Societies, and 4.Climate Resilience and Natural Resources. Gender equality,
non-discrimination, climate resilience and low-emission development are cross-cutting
objectives for all activities. The geographical priority is Africa. The civil society has a
significant role in putting into practice the objective of leaving no-one behind. 
//
Finland has achieved good results in strengthening women’s and girls’ rights and status
and in promoting the rights of persons with disabilities and in enabling developing
economies to offer more jobs, livelihoods and well-being. Tangible results have also
been achieved in regard to improving access to equal education and open governance
in peaceful and democratic societies. Finland is also working to promote climate
resilience and reduce emissions by sustainable use of natural resources. 
//
Finland pursues a human rights-based foreign and security policy. The Government
aims for systematic promotion of human rights through coherent policy actions across
Government departments and agencies. The central aim of the Government policy
is to systematically promote gender equality and the full materialisation of girls’ and
women’s rights. Protection of rights of those in the most vulnerable position, including
human rights defenders, is also central to the Government’s policy. 
//
The 2030 Agenda has been a key tool in making more coherent linkages between
sustainable development policies and the LNOB principle. In earlier years, the LNOB was
typically addressed in the context of Finland’s development cooperation by focusing
on least developed countries, or as part of the social and employment policies in the
national context. These important policy areas remain crucial, but are complemented by
considerations on equality and human rights, both home and abroad. 
//
To reduce inequality and poverty, attention should be paid to safeguarding a sufficient
income and equal health care, social welfare, education and employment services for
everyone. Looking after the welfare of the population, providing employment and
training, and building skills and competences in all sectors and at all levels, will help in
achieving an open, equal, participatory and non-discriminating society. 
//
The Nordic welfare model has been effective in preventing inequality among different
population groups within societies. The common basis for the Nordic welfare model
includes a wide range of public welfare services and tax-funded services, close tripartite
cooperation between social partners and the state, the considerable role of self-governing
municipalities in providing services, the promotion of gender equality and an active
civil society. There is a strong consensus concerning these fundamental principles across
party lines. There is also a broad understanding of the need to prevent social exclusion
and reduce income inequalities, and on the importance of social inclusion. This has led to
public trust that the institutions of society will work in everyone’s best interest. 
//
The tried and tested basic principles and values of the Nordic welfare model should be
highlighted constantly. They will automatically be passed down to future generations.
Social services and benefit systems are part of a broader welfare policy that also takes
into account the root causes of social problems and aims to prevent them from emerging. 
When individual target groups are dealt with separately, it is easy to forget the holistic
view, meaning that measures may not lead to sustainable and permanent results. 
//
The most effective way to reduce inequality is to change the structures of society. There is
solid evidence of the links between structural factors in society, such as poverty and poor
living conditions, low education and unemployment, and the poor health and wellbeing
of individuals and, in turn, the national economy. In Finland, reducing socio-economic
inequalities in wellbeing and health has been a policy objective for a long time, but there
are still many challenges when it comes to addressing the causes of increased inequality. 
Inequality can be reduced by making “Well-being in all policies” a conscious goal at all
levels of government. Reducing unemployment, improving basic security and services,
strengthening inclusion and communality, and taking into account the needs of
vulnerable groups all play a key role. A healthy, capable and competent population is also
the foundation for a sustainable economy. 
//
Finnish labour legislation promotes equal treatment of employees and equal competition
between companies. The legislation is very gender-neutral and inclusive. The same is
true of social welfare legislation. According to the 2017 statistics, poverty among those in
employment in Finland is the lowest in the EU (less than three per cent). 
//
Social dialogue, a well-functioning negotiation system and cooperation between
organisations and the Government on issues related to the development of working life and
the promotion of employment are central to finding solutions to common challenges. The
protection provided by the social security system is an essential means of preventing poverty
and protecting individuals from various risks. Exclusion is also tackled through extensive
activities of civil society organisations, which receive assistance from public authorities. 
//
The quality of life of Finns over the age of 20 has improved continuously. Women and
men rate their quality of life as equally good. There has been a slow change in attitudes
towards equality over the last 20 years. Women and men are estimated to be slightly more
equal than before. However, the experience of the realization of equality is still considered
as worse by women than by men. Experienced wellbeing is linked to social and economic
standing in that the better-off experience a better quality of life. In general, the health
of Finns has improved starting from the 1990s. That said, the great health inequalities
between different population groups in Finland remain a major concern. People living in
South and West Finland are healthier than those living in East and North Finland. 
//
There are also differences in access to health services depending on the population group
and region. Long waiting times hamper access to public primary health care. The prevalence
of mental health problems is a problem that easily leads to dropping out of school,
unemployment, inactivity and exclusion. Intimate partner violence poses a particular threat
to women; Finland is the second most violent country for women in the EU. 
//
An increasing number of young people aged between 15 and 24 are in education or
employment. The proportion of young adults outside employment and education has decreased considerably in recent years. Loneliness has also decreased among young
people, especially boys. 
//
The general level of education in the population has continuously increased, and in recent
decades, the growth has been steady. It is worrying, however, that the literacy skills of
Finnish youth are declining, and the differences in learning between girls and boys are
among the greatest in the OECD countries. According to the 2018 PISA survey, there were
clearly more low-performing readers among pupils with immigrant backgrounds than
among the native-born population. 
//
Inequalities between areas of residence have increased. In the largest cities in Finland,
the poor and the rich are concentrated to different neighbourhoods, as are people of
Finnish and foreign origin. In smaller cities and rural areas, access to services is becoming
increasingly difficult. 
//
The number of low income earners at risk of poverty has remained at roughly the same
level, reaching 11.5 per cent in 2017 (Eurostat, OECD). Developing a social security system
that equalises income distribution can effectively reduce poverty in Finland. In 2018,
income transfers reduced the number of people at risk of low income and narrowed the
poverty gap considerably more than the EU average. The increase in income inequality
and in the number of low income earners seems to have stalled. That being said, income
differences remain significant, even though they are lower than the EU average. Poverty
affects some groups of population, such as people with disabilities, more than others.
Family carers are also excluded from the benefits of paid labour, and are at risk of poverty.
According to the assessment report on the sufficiency of basic social security (THL 2019),
basic social security does not often cover the level of minimum consumption considered
reasonable. The level of basic social security also stays below the relative level of poverty
risk. 
//
According to European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, the proportion of children
at risk of poverty and exclusion was 15 per cent in Finland in 2018, which is clearly below
the EU average of 24,9 per cent. 23 per cent of children of non-Finnish citizens were at risk
of poverty. Among the total population, the proportion was 9 per cent. 
//
The employment rate has improved, and fewer people in employment are low income
earners. The gender pay gap is higher in Finland than the EU average. According to the
equality index of European Institute for Gender Equality, Finland fell from third place to
fourth on the scale due to slow development. 
//
The goal of health and social policy is to build a cohesive society and sustainable
wellbeing. The objectives of the Government’s key projects for wellbeing and health in 2015–2019 included promoting wellbeing, reducing inequality, improving the
employment of people with partial work ability and reforming services for families with
children and older people in order to meet the needs of clients. 
//
Employment, education and welfare policy measures for the entire population may not be
sufficient to ensure the inclusion of all population groups. Support measures are needed
alongside them to balance the different starting points arising from different backgrounds.
The purpose of the Non-Discrimination Act is to promote equal opportunities for persons
belonging to different population groups in society. It is the duty of all authorities,
education providers and employers to promote equality between different population
groups in their activities. The purpose of Equality Act is to promote gender equality and to
prevent gender-based discrimination. 
//
Studies show that persons with a minority background, especially those belonging to
visible minorities and those belonging to several minorities at once, are significantly more
vulnerable to discrimination than the rest of the population. 
//
According to the Eurobarometer survey on discrimination produced by the EU, attitudes
towards equality in Finland seem to have become more positive, and attitudes towards
sexual and gender minorities, for instance, have become more tolerant. However, attitudes
towards the Roma remain very negative, and attitudes towards people with disabilities
have not significantly improved. 
//
In the labour market, poor health, disabilities, gender and age are key causes of
discrimination, and the way people with disabilities experience their position in Finland
points to significant problems both in working life and in other areas of life. There is strong
evidence of discrimination against the Roma and many other ethnic minorities in working
life. Unemployment was clearly more prevalent among people with foreign backgrounds
than among the overall population, even after several years of living in Finland. 
//
Hate speech and harassment have increased in Finland as the use of social media has
become more common. This has serious repercussions on the activities and participation
of people facing harassment, leading them to avoid certain places or topics of discussion,
for example. 
//
In particular, persons belonging to visible minorities also have a particularly high risk
of facing discrimination on multiple grounds. Gender is also often a factor in multiple
discrimination. According to a study produced by the Ministry of Justice, discrimination
against people who belong to more than one minority at once is even more frequent and
more likely to occur. It is also more likely to be continuous and all-encompassing. 
//
A reform of the legislation on Non-Discrimination Act was carried out in Finland in
2015, considerably improving the legal protection of victims of discrimination and
strengthening the obligation to promote equality. All authorities have an obligation
to assess the realisation of equality in their activities and to draw up a plan to promote
equality. The same obligation also applies to educational institutions and employers that
regularly employ more than 30 persons. The Equality Act obligates authorities, providers
of education and employers to promote gender equality. 
//
Non-Discrimination Act applies to discrimination on the basis of age, origin, nationality,
language, religion, conviction, opinion, political activity, trade union activity, family
relations, health, disability, sexual orientation or other personal reason. Equality act
prohibits discrimination based on gender, gender identity or gender expression. 
//
One of the main focus areas of the National Action Plan on Fundamental and Human
Rights for 2017–2019 was equality. The projects in the Action Plan increased awareness
about equality, influenced attitudes and the culture of dialogue, promoted good relations
between population groups, supported municipal equality planning and increased the
Government’s capacity to assess the realisation of equality, identify and intervene in
discrimination and promote equality. 
//
The current Government Programme includes a variety of measures related to the
promotion of equality, such as national action plans for combating racism and
discrimination and promoting good relations between population groups, a partial
reform of the Non-Discrimination Act, a working life diversity programme and a suburban
development programme. The Government Programme also includes action plan to
prevent violence against women, action plan for gender equality , equal pay programme,
the parental leave reform and strengthening of wage transparency. According to the
Government Programme, the legislation on confirmation of gender will be reformed to
respect self-determination.
// 
Finland’s human rights -based development policy aims at eliminating poverty, reducing
inequalities and implementing sustainable development goals in the least developed
countries. In order to leave no-one behind, Finland focuses its global 2030 Agenda
implementation on four priority areas: 1. Women and Girls, 2. Sustainable Economies and
Decent jobs, 3. Education and Democratic Societies, and 4.Climate Resilience and Natural
Resources. Gender equality, non-discrimination, climate resilience and low-emission
development are cross-cutting objectives for all activities. The geographical priority is
Africa. 
//
The civil society has a significant role in putting into practice the objective of leaving noone behind. Civil society has proven to reach target groups that would be difficult to reach
through other channels. Finland’s guidelines for Civil Society in Development Policy from
2017, which are anchored in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, have as their
basic premise that independent, vibrant, pluralistic and polyphonic civil societies create
the prerequisites for the peaceful participation of citizens in society and for the realisation
of human rights. Finland places particular focus on the normative aspects of the 2030
Agenda, in aiming to support the most vulnerable and marginalised groups and human
rights defenders. The human rights based approach has been significantly strengthened
since 2015 in Finland’s development policy through the launch of guidelines. The society’s
commitment to sustainable development emphasises the central importance of the
human rights based approach, to promote peace, equality, non-discrimination and justice
both nationally and internationally. Finland has supported international initiatives on
human rights, equality and democracy through both political and economic support.
There was close cooperation with civil society on these themes. A particular focus has
been on organisations working with the most vulnerable groups on the ground, such as
international human rights organizations. 
//
Finland applies a twin-track approach for gender equality. This includes both systematic
mainstreaming across all policy priorities and implementation through targeted
interventions. The targeted interventions focus on sexual and reproductive health and
rights, as well as reducing violence and abuse against all women and girls. Gender
equality is seen as an intrinsic value and we consider it as an essential means to achieve
economic development, also to reduce poverty and to achieve climate targets. Finland
has a strong focus on eliminating multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination with
special focus on ensuring that all our gender equality priorities also include women and
girls with disabilities. 
//
Non-discrimination is our second cross-cutting objective under which we concentrate
on eliminating discrimination against persons with disabilities. This objective is also
implemented by mainstreaming and by targeted interventions. Finland’s priorities are to
strengthen the global disability movement and the capacity of persons with disabilities as
rights holders and the capacity of duty bearers to implement their mandates in respecting,
protecting and fulfilling the human rights. 
//
Finland focuses on four result objectives: 1) A higher number of people, especially women,
young people and those in vulnerable positions and situations, have their right to decent
work, livelihoods and income fulfilled, 2) The private sector is growing, is responsible
and supports sustainable development, 3) Developing country Governments promote
responsible business and a solid business environment for innovations, and 4) The
international community promotes responsible business and innovations to benefit poor
people, especially young people and women.
//
Finland has a broad and consistent approach to enhancing democracy and the status of
civil society. We invest in solving the global learning crisis, as the key for the whole 2030
Agenda. We support enhancing democracy and the rule of law as well as a more effective
tax capacity for developing countries. 
//
Finland has enabled tens of thousands of children and young people to learn by
supporting development of education systems and curricula in several African and Asian
countries. In Ethiopia, Mozambique, Nepal, Myanmar and Afghanistan this support has
been particularly significant. Opportunities for learning have also been enhanced in other
fragile states and conflict areas. 
//
Finland increases action to mitigate climate change and adapt to it and balances the
financing accordingly. We focus on forests and biodiversity, energy, meteorology and
disaster risk management, food and nutrition security and water. Finland emphasises
climate change adaptation (food security and water) as the combining factor in this
priority, with growing resources. 
//
Finland’s foreign and security policy is based on the universality, interdependence
and indivisibility of human rights, as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. All rights – civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural – are equally
important. Enhancing human rights support all the SDG’s.
// 
Human rights are about freedom, justice, equality and dignity. They are about accessing
quality education, technology and clean water, and participation in democratic decisionmaking and promoting rights of indigenous peoples. 
The connections between human rights, peace and security, sustainable development
and climate change are now more relevant than ever. Respect for human rights can
prevent conflicts from emerging and can build a firm foundation for justice, peace and
development, and thus supports SDG16. 
//
Finland empowers civil society and encourages the private sector to partner with us for
the realisation of human rights, peace and security. 
//
The Human Rights Council is a cornerstone of the multilateral system, and Finland
is seeking for a seat in the Council for its term 2022–2024. Finland supports the
independence of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, and aims to
reinforce the Special Procedures and other human rights mechanisms. We remain strongly
committed to the Universal Periodic Review. As a member of the Council Finland would
commit to the objective of further strengthening the Council’s relevance and efficiency.
The main priorities of Finland’s candidacy in the Human Rights Council are: human rights
and technology; human rights and sustainable development; and gender equality and the
rights women and girls. 
//
The Sámi are the only indigenous people in the continental territory of the European
Union. Their status as an indigenous people is enshrined in the Constitution of Finland.
As an indigenous people, the Sámi have the right to maintain and develop their own
language and culture, as well as their traditional livelihoods as part of their culture.
Provisions on the right of the Sámi to use the Sámi language before the authorities are
laid down in a specific Act. Since 1996, the Sámi living in the Sámi homeland have had
autonomy with regard to their language and culture under the Finnish Constitution. The
duties falling within the Sámi people’s cultural autonomy are discharged by the Sámi
Parliament, elected by public ballot. 
//
Finland is home to about 10 000 Sámi people. The total number of Sámi people living
in their traditional settlement areas in Finland, Norway, Sweden and Russia amounts
to 75 000–100000. The Sámi people’s traditional livelihoods include fishing, hunting,
gathering, crafts and reindeer herding, as well as their modern applications. These still
hold considerable communal and cultural significance for the Sámi people. The traditional
livelihoods reflect the relationship between nature and culture as well as the Sámi way of
life. It is fair to say that these livelihoods uphold the Sámi languages and culture, which is
why they are considered to form an important part of the Sámi culture. 
//
Over the period from 2016 to 2020, plenty of developments have taken place in Sámi
affairs. Despite some positive central government measures, Finland has failed to sufficiently promote and protect the Sámi people’s rights as an indigenous people to
guarantee that the Sámi could freely own, use and control their lands, areas and natural
resources. To some extent, their rights have even been undermined by some legislative
developments, such as the Fishing Act (379/2015) and Act 1166/2018 amending the
Environmental Protection Act (527/2014, chapter 10a). At the same time, no significant
legislative reform projects – such as the reform of the Act on the Sámi Parliament
(974/1995) – have been successfully completed for reasons such as what the Sámi
Parliament considers poorly managed negotiations under section 9 of the Act on the Sámi
Parliament.
//
The Sámi Parliament aimed to promote the Sámi people’s rights and status as an
indigenous people while also developing its own administration. In general terms,
plenty of developments took place in the economic, justice and environmental sectors.
Significant progress was made in the sectors of early childhood education and care,
language nest activities, education and training and the Sámi languages. However, the
same cannot be said for the healthcare and social welfare sectors, for example. A brief
compilation of the most important Sámi issues is provided below. 
//
The truth and reconciliation process was included as part of the Sámi Parliament’s Action
Plan for the 2016–2019 electoral term. Process preparations started in 2017. Activities
carried out during the preparatory phase included an expert seminar on international
experiences, consultations with Sámi people, and actual negotiations. The Finnish
Government, the Skolt Village Assembly and the Sámi Parliament’s Plenum adopted a
proposal for establishing a truth and reconciliation commission concerning the Sámi
people at the turn of November and December 2019. The adopted proposal states as
follows: “The purpose of the truth and reconciliation process is to identify and assess
historical and current discrimination, including the assimilation policy of the state and
violations of rights, to find out how they affect the Sámi and their communities in the
current situation, and to propose ways to promote links between the Sámi and the state
of Finland and among the Sámi people. The truth and reconciliation process aims to
raise awareness about the Sámi as the indigenous people of Finland. A further aim is to
ensure that, as a result of the truth and reconciliation process, the state of Finland will
bear responsibility for its actions and, together with the Sámi Parliament, the Skolt Village
Assembly and other Sámi operators, will work to strengthen the realisation of the rights of
the Sámi people in Finland.” 
//
A new milestone was achieved with regard to the Nordic Sámi Convention, as the
negotiations started in 2011 were concluded and the Convention was initialled in January
2017. The Convention subsequently proceeded for consideration by the Sámi Parliaments
of Finland, Norway and Sweden. The Convention was considered in a coordinated manner
through the Sámi Parliamentary Council. As a result of the joint consideration process,
the Council decided to propose further negotiations on a few proposed amendments.
The national Governments have not issued their positions on entering into further
negotiations. 
//
From the Sámi perspective, the most significant of the legislative reform projects initiated
during the 2016–2019 electoral term was the project to amend the Act on the Sámi
Parliament. The preparatory committee for the amendment project submitted its report
on a proposal to the Finnish Government for amending the Act on the Sámi Parliament in
August 2018. However, the Sámi Parliament’s Plenum rejected the proposal because it did
not meet the Sámi Parliament’s expectation of improving the Sámi people’s autonomy. 
//
Progress was made in the teaching of and in the Sámi languages over the period from
2016 to 2020. A special source of joy is the fact that it is possible to study all three Sámi
languages spoken in Finland as a university major subject. Funding was provided for
educating Sámi-speaking subject teachers. Furthermore, a distance learning project
was launched for teaching of and in the Sámi languages outside the Sámi homeland.
Negotiations conducted over the 2016–2020 period succeeded in securing substantial
additional resources for Sámi-language early childhood education and care, i.e. ‘nativelanguage daycare’, and Sámi language and culture nest activities. 
Hate speech against the Sámi and the increasing prevalence of deliberate
misunderstandings, especially in social media, constitute a broad societal problem.
//
Hate speech can even meet the constituent elements of hate crime. In addition to
Finland, the same phenomenon is also present in Norway and Sweden. There were
particularly discernible spikes in hate speech in connection with the process of drafting an
amendment to the Act on the Sámi Parliament and with the Sámi Parliament election. 
//
One of the key objectives of the Sámi Parliament’s 2016–2019 Action Plan was to
implement the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP)
at national and international levels. The Sámi Parliament’s Executive Board discussed
the matter and adopted an implementation plan, but the matter has not progressed
according to its wishes. The process of drafting an amendment to the Act on the Sámi
Parliament contributed to the implementation of the UNDRIP aims. Nevertheless, since
the Act on the Sámi Parliament does not cover all of its areas, it is still necessary to draw
up a national action plan to implement its aims together with the Finnish Government.
The Declaration must be implemented in keeping with the Sámi Parliament’s views. 
//
The LNOB principle is taken into account in national indicators and follow-up in three ways.
Firstly, part of national sustainable development indicators focus directly on issues that
are linked to leaving no-one behind principle. Examples of such indicators are the number
of recipients of basic social assistance, which is the last-resort form of financial assistance,
or the number of young people not in employment, education or training. Secondly, in
part of indicators the data is disaggregated by a certain quality of basic population. For
example, in an indicator measuring the number of households spending more that 40
percent of income in housing, the data is disaggregated by the level of income and by the
type of housing (rental vs. owner-occupied); another example is morbidity index, which
is disaggregated by regions. Thirdly, different aspects of the risk of being left behind are
touched upon in the analyses produced by experts. These analyses, published in the
national follow-up webpage, can bring attention to issues that are relevant from the
LNOB-perspective, but not visible in the data. 
//
National follow-up system include indicators focusing on Finland’s global responsibility.
Some of these indicators reflect LNOB principle in global context. Examples of such
indicators are the number of annual quota refugees, or official development aid to least
developed countries. 
//
The disaggregation of SDG indicators is important for tracking progress in implementing
and monitoring the Sustainable Development Goals and targets. There are currently
over 40 SDG indicators that require in-detail disaggregation by different grounds.
Disaggregated statistical data are mostly available because statistics production widely
utilizes administrative data sources and registers, which provide extensive data on
population and allow a variety of disaggregation possibilities. 
//
Currently, population and social statistics are mostly disaggregated on the basis of age,
gender, place of residence, income, education and language spoken and foreign origin,
for example. Data that cannot be obtained from administrative databases or registers, are
collected from non-statistical data suppliers and also by surveys and studies on specific
interest groups. 
//
Finnish statistical data do not necessary allow the in-depth disaggregation required and
emphasized in certain SDG indicators. For example, disaggregation on the grounds of
vulnerable group status is seldom possible in statistics. Disaggregation on the grounds of
race, ethnic minority grouping, indigenous status and disabilities is currently void from
official statistics for ethical reasons. It has been considered inappropriate to pinpoint
minority groups in statistics compiled for the needs of an equal and democratic society. 
//
The SDG indicator set’s disaggregation needs seem to increase over time. Finland has
extensive register-based statistics that provide an exquisite starting point for compiling
disaggregated statistics. The development of data orient towards indicators missing data
and indicators that need methodological development. In some cases, it will be possible
to calculate and disaggregate indicator data from existing register databases and by using
new data sources, with additional resources. Further enlargement of SDG data ecosystem
towards non-traditional data producers is also required. Deepening of data systems
integration, as well as conceptual, classificational and methodological issues need to be
reconsidered. 
//
The coordination of national 2030 Agenda implementation was moved to the Prime
Minister’s Office (PMO) in 2016. Since then, the importance of sustainable development
policy has increased and cross-sectoral practices have been improved. 
//
Finland’s strategy in the 2030 Agenda implementation is two-fold: first, to show
Government’s political leadership and commitment, and secondly, to engage the whole
society and stakeholders in the implementation by participatory partnerships. 
//
In the Parliament, the Committee for the Future is leading the follow-up of
Government’s work on the 2030 Agenda implementation. There is a continuous
dialogue between the Committee for the Future and the Prime Minister’s Office. 
//
The National Commission on Sustainable Development and the Development Policy
Committee continue their work. The decree on the Development Policy Committee
(2019) lays down a permanent framework for the Committee’s activities and gives it five
long-term main tasks. 
//
Statistics Finland has established an Inter-Agency Network for the collection of national
data on global SDG indicators, and has also established a public platform for the
dissemination of data. 
//
The PMO and National Commission on Sustainable Development have established a
multi-stakeholder Network for National Follow-up and Review, and this Network has
developed a set of national sustainable development indicators. Experts of different
fields write interpretative analyses based on indicators each year, thus explaining the
meaning of changes in indicator values. These analyses are published with a possibility
for public commenting. 
//
The PMO has established a Citizen Panel, which annually assesses the state of
sustainable development in Finland and thereby provides policy-makers information on
how sustainability issues are seen among the Finns. 
//
The PMO commissioned an independent evaluation on national sustainable
development policy in 2019. The results and recommendations of the evaluation have
provided input to the work of the new Government. 
//
The national 2030 Agenda Coordination Secretariat is located within the Prime Minister’s
Office (PMO). The secretariat consists of three officials and supporting assistants. The
Secretary General of the National Commission on Sustainable Development, based in
the Ministry of the Environment, participates in the coordination function of the Prime
Minister’s Office. 
//
For administration, the key policy documents to steer the work for sustainable
development are the Government Programme and its Implementation Plan, as well as
the Government Report on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The key fora to
discuss sustainable development related issues are meetings of the Ministries’ Permanent
Secretaries, the Cabinet Network, Inter-Ministerial Sustainable Development Coordination
Network, and the National Sustainable Development Follow-up and Review Network. All
Ministries are included in these networks enhancing broad involvement, policy coherence
and effective implementation. 
//
The Finnish Government deals with the Government plans and measures for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda through ordinary management system. 
//
The Government convenes regularly in Cabinet evening sessions, where the members of
the Government create joint understanding on the issues at stake, including those related
to sustainable development. The Finnish Government has four statutory ministerial
committees, on foreign and security policy, EU affairs, finance and economy. In addition,
the Government established six other ministerial committees in July 2019 to deal with
employment, climate and energy policy, social and health services, knowledge and
education and innovation, and Rule of Law and internal security. These Committees
apply an inter-ministerial approach in order to overcome the silos and enhance policy
coherence. 
//
The Inter-Ministerial Coordination Network, led by the PMO and consisting of
sustainable development Focal Points from all line Ministries, is the key supporting
body for the Prime Minister’s Office coordination secretariat. The Coordination Network
is mandated to mainstream the 2030 Agenda into all sectors and aims at ensuring and
improving balance between the economic, social and environmental sustainability
and enhancing Policy Coherence on Sustainable Development in the policy planning.
Coordination Network works beyond the Government terms, thus building institutional
memory and ensuring continuity of the policies and measures. 
//
Another important comprehensive forum for sustainable development is the
National Follow-up Network. It is chaired by the Prime Minister’s Office, and includes
representatives from ministries, Statistics Finland, research institutions and various
stakeholder groups. It meets 4–6 times per year and is in charge of the development,
maintenance and revision of national monitoring framework and sustainability indicators. 
Many Ministries have taken the 2030 Agenda as the basis of their own sectoral strategies
and plans. Concrete measures in the line Ministries are operationalized in the form of
performance planning, guidance and budgeting. Some Ministries have established their
own sustainable development networks or teams that enhance integration of sustainable
development in key sectoral administrative and policy documents. 
//
The role of the National Parliament in ensuring effective implementation of the 2030
Agenda has strengthened year by year. In 2017, the parliamentary Committee for the
Future was mandated to take the overall responsibility for the 2030 Agenda issues. It
deals with the Government Reports (2030 Agenda Implementation Plans), Government’s
Annual Reports and State Budget proposals related to the 2030 Agenda. On the bases of
the statements drafted by the Committee for the Future and amended by other relevant
and interested Parliamentary Committees, the Parliament forms a joint position to
Government Reports. 
//
In addition to formal meetings, the Committee for the Future has organized several open
hearings on the 2030 Agenda. The dialogue between the Government and the Parliament
has proved to be very fruitful, improving understanding of sustainable development in all
political parties and thereby contributing to long-term planning and Policy Coherence for
Sustainable Development. 
//
The National Audit Office expressed its interest in assessing Finland’s implementation
and governance for the 2030 Agenda already in 2016. Since then there has been a
regular dialogue between the auditors and sustainable development officials in different
Ministries, which has kept the Ministries active in providing up-to-date information on
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda to the auditors. The first Auditors’ Report was
published in 2019. The Report underlines that the importance of sustainable development
in all line Ministries has increased, but coordination and connection between the sectoral
policy planning and the 2030 Agenda is still rather weak. The Auditor’s Office recommends
that the Ministries need to analyze the sustainability of their policies and measures in a
more systematic way. 
//
In addition to National Auditors’ Office, there are several other national and international
studies and assessments conducted on the implementation and governance of the 2030
Agenda in Finland. For instance, according to OECD study28 Finland has all the assets
to implement the 2030 Agenda in a coherent manner: strong and high-level political
commitment, strategic frameworks for government and society, whole-of-government
coordination and systematic and participatory follow-up and review mechanism. 
//
The national comprehensive external assessment from February 2019 summarized that
Finland’s model for sustainable development governance is diverse and participatory. At
the same time, sustainable development is not sufficiently resourced, nor well enough
integrated into policies, measures and management systems. 
//
Finland has a long tradition in engaging the civil society and other stakeholders in the
sustainable development work. The key mechanism has been the multi-stakeholder
National Commission for Sustainable Development, which has operated continuously
since 1993 under Prime Ministers’ leadership. Throughout these years, over ten
Government coalitions have prioritized sustainable development and engaged in multistakeholder cooperation.
// 
The National Commission was mandated for a new term on 1 February 2020. The term
extends until the end of 2023, beyond the current Government term. Prime Minister
Sanna Marin leads the work, together with vice-chairs, Minister of the Environment and
Climate, Krista Mikkonen, and Minister of Finance, Katri Kulmuni. The Commission includes
57 members and 57 deputy members from all spheres of the society: Government, state
administration, Parliamentary Committees, business and industry, trade unions, regions
and local authorities, civil society organizations, church, and academia. The main task of
the newly appointed Commission is to accelerate the national implementation of the
2030 Agenda, as well as to monitor and assess the progress made. 
//
There are two eminent advisory bodies established to support and challenge the work of
the Commission and to enhance action throughout the Government and the society. A
multi-disciplinary Expert Panel for Sustainable Development, consisting of ten academics,
and a 2030 Agenda Youth Group of 20 young sustainable development “ambassadors”
have both been re-nominated in 2019. 
//
In addition to the National Commission on Sustainable Development, there are several
other important multistakeholder fora to tackle the sustainable development challenges
and accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
The Development Policy Committee is an advisory body representing the parliamentary
parties and society at large. It aims to strengthen the effectiveness of development policy
and to promote relevant dialogue. Development policy refers to consistent activities in
all the areas of international cooperation and national policy that influence the position
of developing countries. It contributes to the promotion of sustainable development and
plays a part in the sharing of global responsibility and in related exercise of influence. The
Committee is located at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, but it is responsible for its own data production and other activities. That is, the Committee works independent of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, other central government or the Government. 
//
The Decree on the Development Policy Committee (2019) lays down a permanent
framework for the Committee’s activities and gives it five long-term main tasks. The
Committee is to: . formulate a common view between parties and stakeholders on topical development
policy issues; . monitor and analyze the implementation of Finland’s development policy guidelines
and Finland’s international commitments; promote decision-making in support of sustainable development in policy areas
affecting the situation in developing countries; make recommendations to the Government on the planning and implementation of
development policy; . raise awareness of topical development policy issues. 
//
A central part of the Committee’s work is to monitor the global dimension of the national
implementation of sustainable development in close cooperation with the National
Commission on Sustainable Development. 
//
A Climate Policy Round Table is a new platform, established by Prime Minister Sanna
Marin’ Government, aiming at creating a common understanding of how Finland can
make a just transition to a carbon neutral society within an accelerated timeframe. There
are 20 representatives in the Round Table from various sectors of society. 
//
One of the most important tools in Finland to boost participation, concrete action
and innovations for sustainable development is called ‘Society’s Commitment
to Sustainable Development, Commitment2050’ (Sitoumus2050 in Finnish). It
provides an implementation tool for anyone in Finland who wants to participate in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda with concrete action. By March 2020, there are
over 2000 operational commitments from all spheres of the society. Private companies,
schools and individual citizens have been the most active partners. As part of the
Commitment2050 tool, a Sustainable Lifestyle -service for citizens enables Finns to
pursue a more sustainable everyday life. With the renewed service, users can first calculate
their personal carbon footprint and then draw up a personal plan to reduce the footprint
by choosing suitable actions from a recommended selection of smart choices. Every
individual plan contributes to the national emissions reduction target. 
//
The Finnish Government is responsible for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in
Finland, as well as for national follow-up and review. The Parliament has a key role in
ensuring accountability of the work of the Government. In addition to the Parliament,
key forums for monitoring and review of the Government’s work on the 2030 Agenda
implementation are the National Commission for Sustainable Development and the
National Development Policy Committee. 
//
Finland’s national follow-up system was
renewed in 2017. It consists of around 45
indicators that are grouped in ten baskets with
specific themes, such as “Resource-wise economy
and carbon-neutral society”, “Housing and
communities”, “Social inequality” and “Global responsibility and policy coherence”. Around
1/3 of national indicators are from the global SDG indicator set, 2/3 are country specific. 
//
National indicators were chosen in 2017 by national follow-up network that is chaired by
the Prime Minister’s Office, and includes representatives from ministries, Statistics Finland,
research institutions and various stakeholder groups. The national follow-up network
meets 4–6 times per year. 
National indicators are updated once a year, during the second and third quarter. Annual
update of data is accompanied with the preparation of interpretative text for each of
the ten baskets. Interpretative texts are prepared by experts of different ministries and
research institutions. The purpose of interpretative texts is to describe the current state
and recent development in Finland, compared to target levels (where they exist) and peer
countries. 
//
Indicators and interpretative texts are published at a website hosted by the National
Commission on Sustainable Development and the Prime Minister’s Office. The Finnish
website includes a possibility to openly comment indicators and interpretative texts. The
address of the English version of the website is kestavakehitys.fi/en/monitoring. 
//
The national follow-up system includes a Citizen Panel, composed annually, where
around 500 volunteers assess the state of sustainable development on the grounds of
national indicators and interpretative texts. 
//
The panel functions in a following way: the task of panelists is to assess the current state
and recent development in Finland in the topics measured by national indicators, based
on data from national follow-up system. Each member of the panel study the indicators and interpretative texts, and based on that information, position the topics measured
by national indicators in a fourfold table. The panelists use an online assessment tool for
making the assessment. In the fourfold table, the lateral dimension indicates recent (5
years) development in a scale from bad to good, and vertical dimension indicates current
state in a scale from bad to good. 
//
The end result shows the location of all indicator-issues in a fourfold table. The location of
each indicator-issue in the fourfold table is the average of the assessments of all members
of the panel. 
//
The value of the fourfold table for decision-making is that different kinds of sustainability
issues are located in different segments of the table. Each segment thereby includes
different advice to policy-making (see Figure 10). Results of 2020 panel are described in
Chapter 6.6. 
//
The National Commission on Sustainable Development organises annually an event called
“The State and Future of Sustainable Development”. This event is organised during the
second quarter of the year. It aims at strengthening knowledge-based discussion on the
state of sustainable development in Finland, and on Finnish society’s efforts for promoting
sustainability and the 2030 Agenda implementation. It also aims at linking national and
global follow-up activities. The event has been organised since 2017 and the theme and
topics have each year followed the theme and SDG-focus areas of the HLPF. 
//
In 2018, Statistics Finland started a project to establish a national reporting platform
for global SDG indicators. The platform was published in February 2019, and is currently
publicly available at the webpage of Statistics Finland. In February 2020, the database
contained national data for 158 global indicators of the total of 244 indicators, i.e. the
coverage was 65 per cent of global SDG indicators. 
//
In order to extend and update the SDG indicator data in the national reporting
platform, Statistics Finland has set up a cooperation network. This group consists of the
representatives of the main data producing bodies such as the National Institute for
Health and Welfare, the Finnish Environment Institute, the Natural Resources Institute
Finland and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, as well as the Prime Ministers’ Office. The
group ensures and coordinates continued development efforts of the database. 
//
In total, there is a network of some 23 institutions and organisations in Finland that
provide data for the national reporting platform database. At the moment, data for 47
additional indicators are under development. The SDG indicator set is currently available
in Finnish, Swedish and English. 
//
Monitoring the state of sustainable development in Finland gives important information
on current state and recent developments. However, it does not provide information on
the ongoing efforts of the Government, or on the impacts of those efforts. Therefore, it is
necessary to have additional mechanisms for monitoring the Government’s efforts in the
2030 Agenda implementation. 
//
The work of the Government is based on the national Implementation Plans that are
submitted to the Parliament as Government Reports. First such Report was submitted in January 2017 and it described then Prime Minister Juha Sipilä’s Government’s efforts
to promote sustainable development and the 2030 Agenda. The Parliament discussed
the implementation Plan extensively in plenary meetings and in Committees in the
spring 2017, and gave the Government recommendations for future work. The role of
the Government Implementation Plan for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is
described in detail in chapter 5.5. 
//
Since 2018, the Government has annually reported to the Parliament on its activities
to promote sustainable development and the 2030 Agenda. This is done as part of
Government’s Annual Report. The Parliament and Parliamentary Committees discuss the
report, and National Audit Office gives the Parliament its assessment of Government’s
report. Based on this, the Parliament annually gives feedback and recommendations to
the Government. 
//
Submitting Government’s Implementation Plan to the Parliament as Government Report
enabled a structured dialogue on the 2030 Agenda between the Parliament and the
Government. This has had a major impact on national work around the 2030 Agenda.
Current Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government has updated the Implementation Plan
and will submit it to the Parliament in autumn 2020. The dialogue between the Parliament
and the Government can continue on that basis. 
//
Finland will report on national progress to the HLPF next time in 2025. 
//
Effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda at national level requires well established
follow-up structures, but also regular and independent evaluation of sustainability
policies. 
//
The Government of Finland is committed to commission an independent evaluation
of national implementation of the 2030 Agenda every four years. The purpose of
independent evaluation, organized towards the end of the electoral period, is to
produce fact-based content on sustainability issues and Government’s progress on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
The first national evaluation report was published in spring 2019. Its findings and
recommendations were brought into pre-electoral debate and they supported the
new Government in the preparation of Government programme and in the update of Government’s implementation plan. More information on the evaluation from the
publication: PATH2030 – An Evaluation of Finland’s Sustainable Development Policy. 
//
The current Government has committed to commission an independent external
evaluation on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in winter 2022–2023. 
//
In 2019, the National Audit Office conducted a performance audit on the promotion of
sustainable development in Finland. Since then, the National Audit Office has allocated
more resources on performance audit work around sustainability and the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Finland’s experience in sustainable development demonstrates that in order to be able
to deliver results, a solid governance for sustainable development needs to be in place.
Accelerated action, transformative solutions and long-term impact are not possible to
achieve by silo approach, by top-down short-term implementation or without political
leadership. There has to be a shared understanding on the roles and responsibilities of
different actors in the society. There has to be a mechanism or mechanisms to ensure
high-level political leadership and participation of relevant societal actors. 
//
Finland’s experience also argues that political leadership is crucial but sustainable
development should not be politicized. The 2030 Agenda needs to be everybody’s
agenda, not just for some political movement or party. This has been a very important
take away from the Finnish society. In Finland, over 10 different Government coalitions,
from left to right and in between, have taken the lead in the work of the National
Commission on Sustainable Development. Every Government has had its own priorities
but the vision, policy principles and the overarching orientation have been transferred
from one Coalition to another. There has been a general will to treasure the good legacy
of long-term sustainable development policy tradition from previous Commissions and
Governments. The best practices have been preserved and enhanced. 
//
All sectors of the society need to feel ownership of the 2030 Agenda. Sustainable
development has often been too “environment” or too “development”. In previous
years, it has also been rather difficult to attract the private sector actors to contribute
to sustainable development in a meaningful way. Both national and international commitments to sustainable development have appeared too stilted to provide value
added to companies’ strategies and operations. SDGs, however, have been successful in
inspiring the companies become part of the global movement: “implementation is not
possible by Governments alone”. Public-private partnerships for sustainable development
have increased significantly in Finland since 2015. 
//
One success story in overcoming the structural barriers is the commitment of the Minister
of Finance of Finland to start systematic integration of sustainable development in the
state budget in 2018. The boldness of the then Finance Minister and the willingness of
the Finance Ministry to depart from normal budgetary procedure proved to be a very
successful decision. Accelerating action for sustainable development is not possible if the
state finances are not supporting the objectives. In addition, the process has increased
awareness of the budget managers of each line Ministry on the importance of linking
finance policy with sustainable development. It is not only good for the people and planet,
but also smart for the state economy. 
//
Finland is at the forefront of international sustainability comparisons, along with other
Nordic countries. In the annual SDG Index report, Finland has been ranked in the top
three after Denmark and Sweden for several years. According to the SDG Index report
2019, Finland has achieved, or is about to achieve, the SDGs related to poverty eradication,
health and well-being, quality education, clean water, energy, decent work and economic
growth, industry and innovation, reduction of inequalities, and the functioning of
institutions and the judicial system. Finland’s biggest challenges, in turn, are related to the
need for changes in consumption and production patterns, climate action, conservation
of biodiversity, the state of the seas and waters, and supporting other countries in
implementing the 2030 Agenda (in particular the low level of development aid). These
findings are in line with the Eurostat Annual Indicator Report and the OECD Report. 
//
Compared to other Nordic countries, Finland performs worse than Sweden and Denmark
e.g. in issues such as gender pay gap, carbon dioxide emissions per capita, the number
of young people not in education, employment or training, and development finance. 
Addressing climate change, bearing global responsibility and changing consumption and
production patterns are common challenges for all Nordic countries. 
//
The evaluation of national sustainable development policy, Polku2030, identified
knowledge, skills and the stability of society as Finland’s sustainability assets. According to the evaluation, Finland should strengthen its ongoing work on the sustainability of
energy system, the sustainable use of forests, the sustainability of the aquatic ecosystem,
the sustainable food system and in strengthening social inclusion and equity. The global
footprint of Finnish consumption was identified as a topic that requires comprehensive
new policy measures. 
//
Chapter 6.2 presents Finland’s progress and current situation in each SDG. For each SDG
the chapter presents first the Government’s assessment of situation, based on statistics,
and then the assessment of various Finnish civil society actors, including CSOs and
trade unions that are working with the SDG in question. All together 57 Finnish civil
society actors participated in the process of estimating Finland’s performance on all
the 17 SDGs, from few to up to 12 actors on each goal. They represent different actors
of Finnish civil society, from small to big ones, from trade unions or national umbrella
organizations of social sector to CSOs mainly working on development cooperation or
smaller activist-based actors. Fingo as the coordinating organization sent out invitations
to CSOs and trade unions to participate in the process. Invitations were sent widely
to all Fingo members (287 CSOs), to Fingo email lists (more than 1 600 members), and
through fellow umbrella organizations. All interested organizations willing to commit
to the intensive process were welcomed to join. The assessments were conducted in
thematic working groups on each goal coordinated by Fingo and they were based on
published reports and other relevant available material. As a final step of the assessment,
the groups defined overall trends for each goal based on the findings of the assessment,
and listed recommendations for the Finnish Government. The names of the participated
organizations are listed at the beginning of the assessment. The common ground for the
assessment was mainly easily found, but on some goals, it required more effort to build up
a common understanding about the state of Finnish progress. 
//
In some SDGs, the assessments of the Government and the civil society actors are well in
line, whereas in some other SDGs there are differences in assessments. The civil society
assessments are attached to the national VNR report in their original form and language. 
//
Chapter 6.3 presents an analysis of Finland’s key changes between 2016 and 2020. This
analysis is based on SDG Index indicators that have remained same between 2016
and 2020. According to the analysis, the most distinctive positive features over the
four years period include the high level of self-reported subjective well-being (SDG3),
excellent outdoor air quality as measured by particle concentration (PM2,5), indicating
high standards of infrastructures (SDG9) and good management and overall quality
of urban environments (SDG11). The indicators with the most notable negative trend
include obesity of adult population (SDG2), life below water (SDG14), and low level of
international concessional public finance, including official development assistance
(SDG17). 
//
Chapter 6.4 tackles externalities and spillovers and chapter 6.5. gives an overview to
the state of sustainable development in Finland, in the light of national sustainability
indicators. Chapter 6.6 describes how Finnish citizens view the state of sustainable
development. This data is based on the outcomes of a citizens panel, composed of around
500 Finns interested in sustainability issues. 

//

IN FINLAND, inequalities in income and wealth are low by
international standards. Relative income disparities and relative
poverty have remained at more or less the same level over
the last 15 to 20 years. In percentage terms, income levels
have increased at the same rate in all income brackets, which
means that absolute poverty has declined, but absolute
income disparities have grown. Persistent low-income earning
exacerbates the consequences of poverty. Persistent at-risk-of
poverty rates remained unchanged; the oldest age groups
have seen a slight decline. Persistent risk of poverty especially
affects student-age young adults and elderly people aged
over 80. Persistent risk of poverty is more prevalent among
men; however, in the oldest age groups, it affects women in
particular. 
//
Finland’s challenge is to maintain a relatively equal
distribution of income and prevent the intergenerational
transmission of poverty. Continued special attention should be
paid to the situation of single-parent families. Many immigrant
groups are also at higher risk of poverty when compared with
the general population. Poverty is somewhat deeper among
low-income men than women. 
//
Finland has succeeded in avoiding growth in income
disparities over the 2010s. Pensioners have also seen positive
developments in their income levels. 
//
As for the global responsibility, the purpose of Finland’s
development policy and cooperation is eradication of extreme
poverty, reduction of inequalities and sustainable development.
In all activities, the cross-cutting objectives are gender equality,
non-discrimination and climate sustainability. The geographical
focus is Africa and particularly fragile states. 
//
Through the UN and other international organisations and
partnerships, Finland supports and promotes universal social
protection model, in which actions and systems cover the entire
population. In 2015–2019, Finland supported the construction
of social security systems in Africa and Asia, with particular
emphasis on women, girls, people with disabilities and the
objectives of decent work. 
//
To adjust general government finances, the National Pension Index was frozen for the 2017–2018 period. 
The basic component of social assistance was raised. 
General increases have been made to the levels of benefits such as guarantee pensions and minimum daily sickness allowances. The levels of basic social security benefits were also raised. 
Tax-funded pensions were raised for people on small pensions. The general and index increases made to national and guarantee pensions aim to safeguard the livelihoods of pensioners while reducing poverty and deprivation. 
Child benefits were raised for families considered to be at the highest risk of poverty (families with multiple children, single-parent families), while also increasing the amount of the basic component of social assistance for single parents.
//
FINLAND WILL NOT REACH THE TARGET OF REDUCING the
number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion. In its EU
2020 strategy, Finland committed to having 770 000 people at
risk in 2020. In 2018 the number was 856 000 (15.8 per cent of
the population). 
//
The index cuts and freezes adopted in 2016–2019 had
a significant effect on basic social security. The reductions
in social security benefits caused more people to become
dependent on social assistance. In 2018 it was paid to one
household in ten, a total of 470 000 people. Poverty was also
increased by the high cost of rental housing as well as increases
in health care client fees and the deductible on travel and
medicine costs. Based on a statutory evaluation of adequacy
of basic social security, the income levels of those receiving
unemployment benefit, home care allowance, minimum sick
leave allowance or parental daily allowance are not sufficient to
cover the reasonable minimum consumption budget. Student
social security covers the reasonable minimum consumption
budget only if supplemented by a student loan. Basic pension
security, on the other hand, is sufficient to meet this minimum
consumption target, but the assessment does not include cost
of illness.
//
Around 120 000 children are affected by poverty, and
its impact on opportunities available in life already affects
children under 2 years. Poverty makes attending school more
difficult, it reduces leisure time options and it increases the risk
of marginalisation. The rate of children living in low-income
households has increased from 10.2 per cent (2016) to 10.5 per
cent (2018). The Government has not tied child benefits to an
index, although they would need to increase between 47 and
68 per cent if the aim was to match in real terms the level paid
at the launch of the current system (in 1994). Other groups at
risk of poverty include those living alone, the underemployed,
single parents, immigrants, people with disabilities, people with
long-term illnesses and imprisoned inmates. Around seven per
cent of entrepreneurs are living under the poverty line, with
poverty affecting the self-employed in particular. 
Finland is not meeting its obligations regarding the
global reduction of poverty. From 2015 to 2019, Finland cut
approximately 40 per cent of its development assistance – even
from CSOs, even though they reach the people in the most
vulnerable position. Finland is not complying with the payment
of 0.2 of GNI to the least developed countries (the figure in 2019
was 0.15), and its humanitarian aid payments have decreased
30 per cent from 2014. 
//
Finland has taken some action to reduce poverty. 
Although basic social security was mostly subject to index
freezes and cuts, individual benefits were also increased in
2016–2019, including guarantee pension and the minimum
sickness and parental allowances. Normal index increases were
re-introduced from the beginning of 2020, and the smallest
pensions, minimum daily allowances (incl. unemployment and
sickness allowances), child maintenance allowance and singleparent supplement to the child benefit and child benefit for the
4th and 5th child were increased. The trend is going in the right
direction, but the increases do not cancel out the previous cuts.
//
An improved employment rate has benefited the
unemployed who are now employed, and the number of people
who have been unemployed for over a year almost halved in
2015–2019 (from 122 000 to 63 000). Positive aspects include
the reforms taking effect in 2020: restoring the subjective right
to day care for all children, dismantling the activation model
and re-linking the study grant to the national pension index. 
//
continue increasing the level of basic social security and create an accessible and flexible social security system.
 increase the production of affordable rental housing.
make the decision to provide free upper secondary education and support the equal opportunities of children and young people to leisure time activities .
update employment services so they provide more personalised support.
assess not just the number of vacancies but also their decency.
support those in the most vulnerable situations through development cooperation; direct at least 0.2 of GNI to the poorest development countries.
increase the amount of humanitarian assistance.
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Attac
Finland, Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions SAK,
Fida International, Finnish Development NGOs Fingo, Finnish
Foundation for Supporting Ex-Offenders, Save the Children
Finland, Finnish National Organisation of the Unemployed,
SOSTE Finnish Federation for Social Affairs and Health. 
//
IN FINLAND, there is little malnutrition, whereas obesity is
prevalent. National challenges are related to dietary quality.
People in general consume too much energy, salt and
saturated fat and not enough fruits, vegetables or wholegrain
cereals, while men in particular eat too much red meat and
meat products. Sustainability has been included in Finnish
nutrition recommendations since 2014. In recent years, the
recommendations have been updated and healthy nutrition
has been promoted by influencing mass catering. 
//
Specific challenges for Finland include obesity and
dietary quality. In 2017, the majority of adults were at least
slightly overweight while 26.1% of men and 27.5% of women
aged over 30 were obese (with body mass index of 30 kg/m2
or over). Almost one in two adults (46%) is also abdominally
obese. The problem is already evident in children: in 2018, 4%
of girls and 8% of boys aged 2–16 were obese. There is room for improvement in the quality of nutrition. In 2017, only 14% of
men and 22% of women consumed at least the recommended
half a kilogram of fruits, berries and vegetables per day. The
recommended intake of salt and saturated fat was exceeded by
nine out of ten adults. 
//
Finland has succeeded in ensuring food security, while
malnutrition is not an issue. Free school meals and other
subsidised mass catering secure nutrition and even out socioeconomic disparities. The comprehensive health clinic system
makes it possible to address problems at an early stage. 
//
Key measures to improve environmental sustainability
in agricultural production are included in the EU common
agricultural policy. The measures have aimed to reduce
environmental nutrient pollution; maintain biodiversity;
improve air quality; mitigate and promote adaptation to climate
change; and maintain good soil condition. A major challenge
relating to the sustainability of agriculture is low profitability,
which has been tackled by seeking appropriate measures.
A more permanent solution can only be found through
agricultural productivity improvements, increasing market
prices and moderate cost developments. 
//
As for global responsibility, promotion of food security is
part of development policy. Finland supports the development
of sustainable agricultural production and food value chains,
land management and organisation of small-scale farmers, in
particular. During the previous government term, Finland supported about 900000 food producers through bilateral and CSO
projects, improving food security for over four million people. 
//
In 2017, the Government published its report on food policy,
entitled Food2030, and launched its measures. The meal
recommendations for early childhood education and care
(2018), schools (2017) and the upper secondary level (2019)
have strengthened the opportunities of children and young
people for healthy nutrition. Nutrition recommendations for the
elderly are to be completed in 2020. Sustainability is part of all
recommendations. Healthy nutrition has also been supported
through key government projects and project funding. Some
schools launched a system to distribute fruits and vegetables
in 2017. As a result of the 2019 Government Programme, the
excise duty on sugary soft drinks was increased, a ‘climate food’
programme is getting started, and the knowledge base on
children’s and young people’s nutrition will be improved. 
//
The EU common agricultural policy for 2014–2020 includes
many measures to promote the overall sustainability of
agriculture and rural areas. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE is the deprivation of some people,
which also involves hunger or food shortages, but there is very
little data or statistics on the need for support. 
//
According to Eurostat, in 2018 the price of food in Finland
was almost 20 per cent higher than in other EU countries.
Despite this, Finland has not used tax policy to support access
to food. It would be possible to influence the price structure
of food in such a way that would allow producers to gain a
sufficient livelihood from sales while consumers could afford to
buy nutritious and healthy food. 
//
Food security could be promoted both nationally and
globally to ensure an even-handed improvement in general
wellbeing while also ensuring natural biodiversity and climate
sustainability. Globally, malnutrition and hunger particularly
affect food producers and agricultural workers. It would be
possible for Finland to better promote global food security
by investing in the development of food systems in its
development policy. In 2016–2019, however, Finland cut its
development cooperation and research finance, and the finance
of themes affecting food security has received little attention. 
//
There has not been much fluctuation in agricultural
greenhouse gas emissions from one year to another; in 2018
they made up 11 per cent of Finland’s overall emissions.
Methane emissions from dairy production, for example, have
been reduced in the past 50 years. Yet, much remains to be
done in terms of reducing overall food production emissions if
Finland is to achieve carbon neutrality in 2035. 
//
On arable sector the yield levels of cereal crops have not
increased in the 2000s. Reasons for this include the poor
profitability of food production, the fact that a large share of
the total cultivated area is leased land where the duration of
leases is short. Thus, it has not been possible to properly care
and conserve soil fertility.  A positive aspect is that the use
of industrial commercial fertilisers has decreased, and efforts
have been made in the recycling of nutrients and the purity
of recycled nutrients. The decrease in nutrient volumes can
be seen as a decline of nitrogen and phosphorus in nutrient
balances over the past 30 years. 
//
Finland has succeeded at national level in diversifying food
assistance and making it more humane while also improving
access to it. There has also been a shift in attitudes, so that those
receiving food assistance feel less stigmatised. 
//
Food assistance structures have been clarified and there is
now better awareness of how to administer food assistance.
The circular economy aspect and acceptance of reducing food
waste have had a positive impact on food assistance. Food
assistance is provided through a chain with a growing number
of actors. Municipalities, civil society organizations, churches
and grocery stores are often involved.  
//
Since 2016, Parliament has granted government subsidies
to third sector operators providing food assistance. In 2019
subsidies were also granted for developing long-lasting food
assistance solutions in addition to urgent food assistance. 

//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Fida
International, Finnish Development NGOs Fingo, Food and
Forest Development Finland (FFD), Church Resources Agency,
Central Union of Agricultural Producers and Forest Owners
(MTK), the Finnish Blue Ribbon, International Solidarity
Foundation, the Finnish National Organisation of the
Unemployed, 
//
FINLAND HAS SUCCEEDED in guaranteeing high-quality
public health care for the entire population. Access to primary
health care and specialized medical care is guaranteed
regardless of the patient's or client's ability to pay. Finland has
managed to reduce significantly pre-mortem deaths caused by
non-communicable diseases through efficient prevention and
treatment. 
//
Finland has successfully increased awareness of mental
health promotion and mental disorders and reached a broad
consensus on the measures to launch, while also preparing
a National Mental Health Strategy for 2020–2030. Suicide
mortality is declining in Finland. Finland has successfully
reduced smoking, especially among younger age groups. 
//
A specific challenge for Finland is to bring down the
numbers of other causes of premature mortality, including
accidental and violent causes of death, alcohol-related mortality, and suicides. Mental health problems are a growing
public health challenge. Obesity became a key public health
challenge among both men and women between 2012 and
2017. 
//
Finland’s challenge is that problems with health, safety
and wellbeing only tend to accumulate for some individuals.
Bringing down the overall burden of premature mortality
would require the capacity to also influence other causes of
death (external causes, alcohol-related mortality, and suicides).
Special attention should be paid to narrowing the differences in
mortality between socio-economic groups. 
//
In addition, Finland has challenges with access to services,
which is manifested in terms such as regional differences in
availability and waiting times. The reforms of health and social
services and social security are among the key national policy
initiatives, which are being prepared and implemented in
different areas and at different levels. 
//
Global responsibility. Finland is very active in operations
under the World Health Organisation (WHO) and supports
strengthening the European Union’s role in the field of
global health. Among other things, Finland supports the
implementation of the WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control in all countries as required. 
//
Finland supports the research and development of vaccines
and medicines for communicable and non-communicable
diseases that primarily affect developing countries. We also
endorse the Doha Declaration on the WTO Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement). The agreement guarantees access to affordable
essential medicines and vaccines and affirms the right of
developing countries to use to the full the flexibilities included
in trade agreements on intellectual property rights. Finland
works actively to ensure that all countries have the capacity for
early warning, risk reduction and management of national and
global health risks. 
//
Over the 2017–2018 period, Finland implemented a package of
key government projects, including the key projects to promote
career opportunities for people with partial work ability and to
foster health and wellbeing and reduce inequalities, the reform
of home care and informal care, and the programme to address
reform in child and family services. The previous Government
prepared an administrative reform of health and social services,
which is still ongoing. The reforms address the shortcomings
and new challenges identified in the benefit and service
systems. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that funding for global health
efforts has decreased in the past few years although health
has traditionally been a key focus for Finland. It is particularly
alarming that Finland no longer funds the UN Programme on
HIV/AIDS, UNAIDS. Finland has special expertise in health-care
development, and development cooperation in the health
sector is proven to have an impact. Global health competence is
also a safeguard as Finland prepares for global health threats. 
//
Finland’s health service system is among the least equitable
in Europe. There are significant inequalities in health and wellbeing. The uneven geographical distribution of health care
resources reinforces inequality in access to care. There have
been attempts to reform the service structures during several
government terms but these attempts have been unsuccessful. 
//
The number of elderly people in Finland continues to
increase, with the number set to reach 1.5 million in 2030. There
are not enough measures promoting health and well-being
targeted at older persons. 
//
The investment in sexual health in Finland decreased. The
only government authority that coordinated the promotion
of sexual and reproductive health, the Seli unit of the Finnish
Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), was abolished. 
//
The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim and medical
specialist societies produce evidence-based current care
guidelines on significant diseases with an impact on national
health and on their prevention, treatment and rehabilitation.
Due to declining funding, they can no longer produce new
guidelines or maintain all current ones. 
//
The Alcohol Act of 2017 increased the availability of alcohol.
Alcohol-related causes explain one fifth of differences in
mortality by social group among Finnish men and one sixth
among Finnish women. Medicine shortages have drastically
increased over the past ten years and they have partially
led to extended supply shortages of some vitally important
medicines. Households’ share of health-care expenses is greater
in Finland than in other Nordic countries or in the EU on
average. In Finland, psychotherapies and other psycho-social
treatment methods are part of the public sector health services,
but their availability is poor. 
//
Finland has succeeded in highlighting sexual and
reproductive health in its development policy and in actively
defending them and the associated rights in the EU. Finland has
highlighted the rights of the disabled as an overarching theme
of development policy and finances the UN Partnership to
Promote the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which is mainly
executed by non-governmental organisations, particularly
disabled people’s organisations. 
//
The Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government
highlights the narrowing of health and well-being gaps through
high-quality health and social services as one of its goals, while
highlighting preventive health policy and health-promoting
taxation. The Programme pledges to secure necessary care and
treatment also for all undocumented migrants. If enacted in
law, this would be a significant step in realising a fundamental
human right. 
//
The Programme also proposes to trial free contraception
for everyone under the age of 25, which is significant for the
sexual health and equality of young people. The Tobacco Act
has reinforced the policy on tobacco and created nicotinefree living environments. Smoking has decreased throughout
the population, especially among young people. Finland
has published a national mental health strategy and suicide
prevention programme for 2020–2030 and launched the
preparation of a child strategy that will extend beyond one
government term of office. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, EHYT Finnish Association for
Substance Abuse Prevention, the Finnish Association of People
with Physical Disabilities, Physicians for Social Responsibility
– Finland, MIELI – Mental Health Finland, SOSTE Finnish
Federation for Social Affairs and Health and the Family
Federation of Finland. 
//
THE LEVEL OF EDUCATION in Finland is high. Over the
2010s and the last few years, however, the level of educational
attainment among younger age groups has not continued to
rise. Finland guarantees all citizens high-quality education free
of charge from pre-primary to higher education. 
//
Finland’s challenge is the recent decline in the traditionally
strong reading literacy. In Finland, the skills gap between girls
and boys is the largest of all OECD countries. While differences
between schools have traditionally been small in Finland, differences between pupils have increased. The impact of socioeconomic background on an individual’s learning outcomes has
grown.
// Finland has succeeded in increasing the proportion of
people aged 25 to 64 who have completed at least basic
(primary and lower secondary) education by two percentage
points to 82.5% during the 2010s. The proportion of those who
have completed at least a vocational qualification increased
by about four percentage points to 78.8% while the increase
for those with higher education degrees was about 6.5 points,
reaching 28%. Participation in adult education is at a high level:
about 50% of people aged 25 to 65 take part in education in
Finland. Adult education participation rates have decreased
slightly from the peak year of 2012. 
//
As for global responsibility, Finland has contributed to
helping thousands of children and young people to learn by
supporting the development of education systems in several
African and Asian countries. Learning opportunities have also
been supported in fragile states and conflict areas. 
The new National Core Curricula and their deployment have
resulted in building up a phenomenon-based approach in all
subjects. 
//
A vocational education and training forum has increased
student orientation, workplace relevance and flexibility. 
The revised Act on Early Childhood Education and Care
restores the equal right to early childhood education and
care to all children. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that despite emphasis on
education in development cooperation, the multi-stakeholder
cooperation is not working well enough and despite
dialogue, the various parties are operating in silos. Finland is
eagerly exporting its expertise and wishes to strengthen the
relationship between education export and development
cooperation. This relationship is not clear, though, and its
priorities and premises should be clarified. Ethical ground rules
should be put in place in the discussion on export of education. 
//
The elegant phrases on sustainable development in the
new early childhood education and national core curricula are
put at risk as the workload of teaching staff and expectations
increase. Attaining the education target both in Finland and
globally requires a high level of education among teachers,
safe and sound working conditions and appropriate pay. This
has not been taken into account sufficiently in development
cooperation. 
//
In Finland a key issue requiring improvement is equality in
education. Parental education level and socio-economic status
are strongly associated with children’s school achievement and
continued interest in studying. In educational achievement
between genders, girls have a clear advantage, and young
people with disabilities experience discrimination and
inequality. Regional equality has also been endangered as
education is increasingly concentrated in larger units and
population centres. 
//
There is fairly limited selection of adult-education
opportunities promoting competencies for sustainable
development and global civic skills, although these
competencies are sorely needed amidst the structural changes
in society. Opportunities for continuous learning should be
developed both in Finland and globally. 
//
Finland has succeeded in responding to the globally
acknowledged crisis of learning and has actively striven to
have an outsized role in finding solutions. Education is one
of the priorities in Finland’s development cooperation. Equal,
high-quality education is actively addressed in bilateral and in
multilateral development cooperation as well as in CSO work. 
//
In Finland, sustainable development and global civic
skills feature prominently in the national curricula and in
qualifications from early childhood education to primary
and secondary education. Transversal competences support
active global citizenship, and value systems feature values
that promote a sustainable future. In the public funding for
the continuing professional development of teachers, the
sustainable development perspective has been emphasised.
The premises of the new Youth Act also include principles that
point the way to active global citizenship. 
//
The objectives of free upper secondary education and
raising the compulsory school age stated in the Government
Programme promote equal opportunity to attain at least an
upper secondary level qualification and provide students with
sufficient educational skills for higher education. The changes
enable an increase in educational level and employment.
Alongside these, it is important to maintain existing success
factors, such as sufficient student counselling and opportunity
for flexible study paths and continuous learning. 
//
Finland must in all the educational cooperation that it finances, require
the improvement of educational opportunities of those in a
disadvantaged situation and enhancement of the quality of
teaching systematically work to promote equality in education in
Finland and globally bring into focus global civic skills and competencies for
sustainable development also in adult education, and
reinforce non-formal and informal learning opportunities
side by side with formal training pay attention to regional differences, teacher resources and
support for pupils to secure access to high-quality education
throughout the country. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Finnish Development NGOs Fingo, the Finnish Association of People with Physical Disabilities, The Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions, Central Union of Agricultural Producers and Forest Owners MTK, Open Knowledge Finland, National Union of University Students in Finland, Plan International Finland, SOSTE Finnish Federation for Social Affairs and Health, The Trade Union of Education in Finland OAJ, Felm, Finnish Committee for UNICEF
//
FINLAND’S GENDER EQUALITY situation is good. General
progress in equality can be examined in a longer perspective
by means of various international gender equality rankings.
The most recent rankings include the Gender Equality Index
of the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) and the
Global Gender Gap Index of the World Economic Forum. In the
EIGE Gender Equality Index of 2019, Finland received the fourth
highest score within the European Union. The score remained
more or less the same when compared with 2017. While the
World Economic Forum’s 2018 ranking still places Finland
among the top countries, it slipped from third to fourth place
from 2006. This was due to reasons such as the faster gender
equality progress made in other top-ranking countries. 
//
Finland’s challenges include violence against women and
domestic violence, as well as gender equality issues in the
world of work. Finland is the second most violent country for
women within the European Union. The gender pay gap is
shrinking slowly, currently standing at 16%. The labour market
is highly segregated and fathers only take about 10% of family
leave time. 
//
Finland has succeeded in increasing services intended
for victims of violence against women and domestic violence.
Other positive developments include growing skills in gender
equality promotion and the stronger role of equality promotion
in some branches of government. Government Proposals
incorporated a slightly higher number of gender impact
assessments when compared with previous years. Genderaware budgeting was developed in a project led by the Ministry
of Finance. 
//
Implementing global responsibility: Finland’s foreign and
security policy is based on human rights. Its key objective is to
systematically promote gender equality and full realisation of
the human rights of girls and women. Finland places particular
emphasis on sexual and reproductive health and rights, which
are currently being challenged on a global scale, including
within the European Union. Likewise, strengthening the role of
women in mediation processes as part of the implementation
of the UN Security Council Resolution 1325 is among Finland’s
long-standing priorities. Finland is also paying attention
to emerging themes, such as the equality impacts of new
technologies and innovations. 
//
Key national policy initiatives in 2015–2020 Funding for shelters for domestic violence victims was raised
considerably, by a total of 70% over the period from 2016 to
2019. A 24/7 helpline was opened for victims of violence and their
loved ones. A low-threshold service was opened for sexual assault
victims. A prohibition on discrimination based on gender identity
and expression was included in the Act on Equality between
Women and Men. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that the drastic cuts to
development cooperation funding brought a 40 per cent
reduction to funding directed at the priority focussing on
women’s and girls’ rights. The goals and impact of this priority
have remained unclear, and gender equality has not received
the promised cross-cutting attention in development policy. 
//
The implementation of the UN Security Council resolution
1325 on Women, Peace and Security is hampered by insufficient
human resources both in the public sector and in CSOs, and the
mainstreaming of implementation is not sufficiently realised.
//
As many as 47 per cent of Finnish women have experienced
physical and/or sexual violence, and disabled women and
immigrant women experience violence 2 to 3 times as
frequently as other women. 
//
The revision of the Act on Legal Recognition of the Gender
of Transsexuals to comply with fundamental human rights
is in the making. The financing of women’s shelters and the
number of places in them is insufficient considering the need
and recommendations. Human trafficking related to sexual
exploitation is poorly recognised in Finland. Sufficient resources
have not been secured to implement the programme against
female genital mutilation, the criminalisation of forced marriage
cannot be enforced, and child marriages contracted abroad
have not been criminalised. 
//
Educational and professional fields are largely segregated
by gender, and the gender pay gap has narrowed slowly. A
woman’s euro is 84 cents – and an immigrant woman’s 62 cents. 
Women’s employment rate is lower than that of men, and they
work part-time and under fixed-term contracts more often than
men. Unpaid care is unequally divided between the genders. 
Mothers with low education level and no job to return to stay
longest on child home care allowance. In 2015–2019 the focus
in elderly care was shifted from institutional care to care at
home with family members as caregivers. Two out of three fulltime family caregivers are women. 
//
Finland successfully made the rights and status of women
and girls a development policy priority in 2016, and views
sexual and reproductive health and rights as important themes. 
Finland has actively defended these rights internationally and
included promoting SRHR as one of the key themes of the new
guidelines on humanitarian assistance in 2019. 
//
Finland prepared its third national action plan for the
implementation of the UN Security Council resolution 1325
in 2018−2021. Following the ratification of the Istanbul
Convention in 2015, services available for victims of violence
have been increased. In 2019, the Act on Child Custody and
Right of Access took effect, all underage marriages were banned
and the penal scale for sexual offenders violating children was
adjusted to make punishments more severe. The references to
“man” and “woman” were removed from the Marriage Act. 
//
The political participation of women has increased. In the
2019 Parliamentary election, a record number of women were
elected as Members of Parliament, 46 per cent of all MPs. The
Government has a female majority, and Finland has its first
female European Commissioner. 
//
Finland must prepare a gender equality strategy for foreign policy that
covers the entire state administration and allocate relevant
resources for it; increase development cooperation funds so that women’s
rights can be sufficiently promoted globally and ensure that
85 per cent of new projects promote gender equality as the
primary target or as a significant secondary target; address structural intersectional discrimination, safeguard
the rights of women in a precarious situation; promote equality at work through pay transparency and
equal pay, and with regard to pregnancy discrimination and
family leaves; introduce gender impact assessment and gender-aware
budgeting as permanent features of state and municipal
administration; implement the Istanbul Convention in full; violence against
women is Finland’s most extensive human rights issue.
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: National
Council of Women of Finland, Coalition of Finnish Women’s
Associations NYTKIS, Plan International Finland, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, Central Organisation of Finnish Trade
Unions SAK, Felm, UN Women Finland, the Family Federation of
Finland. 
//

WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT and water protection
are at a high level in Finland. Water has also played a key role
in Finland’s development cooperation and participation in the operations of international organisations. 
//
Finland’s challenges include achieving the targets set for
the status of seas and waters and adequately reducing water
pollution from certain industries, such as agriculture and
forestry. This is reflected in the poor status of several water
bodies in Western and Southern Finland and Baltic Sea coasts. 
//
Conversely, Finland has succeeded in water protection,
albeit most developments have already been in place for some
time. A holistic approach to water resources management
and water protection has long provided the foundation for
operations and has further improved with new legislation.
While Finland’s water supply and tap water quality are at worldclass level, investments must be made in the management of
risks, water supply infrastructure and stormwater runoff in order
to secure reliability and quality for years to come. 
//
As for global responsibility, Finland is especially renowned
for advancing cooperation in transboundary waters and
water diplomacy and as a promoter of drinking water supply,
sanitation and hygiene in several developing countries,
including Ethiopia and Nepal. In Finland, about half of water
footprint of consumption comes from abroad and part of
Finnish companies operate in the regions that may suffer from
scarcity of water resources. These risks have to be considered. 
//
New water, marine and flood risk management plans, their
objectives and measures as well as their implementation. 
//
The International Water Strategy of Finland for 2018–2030
striving towards responsible and equitable water security
and its yearly updated Action Plan including concrete
policies and actions. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS the ageing of the water and
sewage networks. It has been estimated that EUR 200 to 300
million per year should be invested in their renovation rather
than the current EUR 100 million. 
//
In some groundwater areas, concentrations of harmful
substances have been detected, and water quality may
deteriorate without protection measures. In Finland,
recipient bodies of water receive untreated wastewater
under exceptional circumstances, even though the law states
that treatment stations must comply with their treatment
obligations even in these circumstances. In some areas,
insufficient domestic wastewater treatment may cause risks to
drinking water. 
//
It is a concern that Finland’s development policy
prioritisation of water and sanitation is not evident in practice.
Development cooperation allocations for these purposes have
fallen from USD 33 million (2013) to around USD 4.5 million
(2017), and payments from EUR 130 million (2016) to just over 2
million (2018). 
//
Finland has succeeded in making water supply and
sewerage systems available to nearly 100 per cent of the
population. Around 90 per cent of households get their
domestic water from a centralised water supply system and
around 85 per cent of the population is covered by municipal
sewerage and centralised wastewater treatment. The quality
of domestic water provided by the centralised water supply
system is very good. Approximately 65 per cent of domestic
water is groundwater. Finland has around 3 900 groundwater
areas that are significant for water supply, and most of these are
in a good condition. 
//
In recent years, Finland has further increased the safety of
water use. As an example, in 2017 plants supplying domestic
water were obligated to conduct a risk assessment, the
Environmental Protection Act was amended and a Government
Decree on Treating Domestic Wastewater in Areas Outside
Sewer Networks (rural areas wastewater decree) and a new
construction decree including provisions on the accessibility of
toilet and washing facilities were issued. The transition period
of the rural areas wastewater decree expired in 2019. Guidance
and counselling increased general awareness of the importance
of appropriate wastewater treatment. Guidance was also
beneficial to owners of holiday cabins and cottages. 
//
Five ministries (Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry, Ministry of the Environment, Ministry
of Economic Affairs and Employment and Ministry of Social
Affairs and Health) in 2018 prepared a joint international water
strategy, the implementation of which will be planned and
reported on an annual basis. In 2019, Finland updated the
national goals for the Protocol on Water and Health up to 2030.
The goals must be achieved or maintained to prevent illnesses
caused by water. 
//
The water protection enhancement programme 2019–2023
launched by the Ministry of the Environment strives to make
Finland the leading water conservation nation in the world, by
reducing nutrients and harmful emissions, by rehabilitating
watercourses and by increasing research and development
efforts. 
//
Since 2016, water and sanitation have been included in
one of Finland’s development policy priorities (food security,
access to natural resources and energy). Another priority, the
strengthening of women’s and girls’ rights, is also evident in
many water, sanitation and hygiene sector projects. Finland has
understood the significance of water and sanitation in attaining
sustainable development goals in other sectors as well. 
//
An innovative operating model has been developed in the
water development cooperation projects funded by Finland
in the 2000s, and this model has yielded good results. In the
model, local communities, schools and health-care centres
apply for funding to build their own water point or toilet,
and take charge of the construction, acquisitions for and
administration of their own water supply. 
//
Finland should reduce agricultural nutrient releases.
Finland should consider water and sanitation issues in climate change
preparations. 
Finland should consider climate change impacts in water supply-related
development cooperation. 
Finland should be more active in sharing its experiences and competence
globally on water supply and sanitation legislation and
practice. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, Global Dry Toilet Association of
Finland, WaterAid. 
//
FINLAND ENSURES universal access to affordable and
clean energy. About four fifths of Finland’s renewable energy
is bioenergy, most of which is based on side streams from
the forestry industry and forest management. Hydropower
accounts for 10% of all renewable energy. During recent years,
there has been growth in the use of energy generated by
wind power and heat pumps as well as transport biofuels, in
particular. 
//
Finland has succeeded: In increasing the share of renewable
energy, which already accounted for 41% of final consumption
in 2018. Finland’s target for renewable energy (7.2) is to account
for at least 51% of final energy consumption by 2030. Wood
fuels are Finland’s most significant sources of energy. 
//
In ensuring universal access to affordable and clean energy
(7.1) through a well-functioning energy market and regulation
to safeguard the position of consumers. Electricity prices in
Finland are relatively low by European standards. According
to Eurostatistics, Industrial electricity prices are among the
lowest in Europe, while consumer prices are clearly below the
European average. 
//
In energy savings: Finland’s overall target for energy savings
during the 2014–2020 period was 49 TWhcum, calculated in
terms of cumulative energy savings according to Article 7 of
the Energy Efficiency Directive (2012/27/EU). Finland already
reached this target via the measures carried out between
2014 and 2016. As a measure affecting all sectors, energy
efficiency (7.3) plays a significant role in reducing greenhouse
gas emissions while also forming an essential part of resource
efficiency. 
//
 Key measures to promote renewable energy (7.2): feed-in
tariff scheme; production aid scheme for forest chips;
investment subsidy for energy production; quota obligation
for biofuels; ban on the use of black coal for energy, effective
as of 1 May 2029; and raising the biofuel quota obligation in
road transport to 30% in 2030. 
Energy efficiency (7.3) is promoted by means of energy
efficiency agreements and energy audits covering all energyconsuming sectors, regulations for construction sector, and
EU-wide eco-design and energy label legislation. 
Finland also supports and encourages households to invest
in renewable energy sources and improve energy efficiency
(7.3). 
//
Through scaling up new technologies and innovations, Finland
contributes to promoting a global change required to transition
into a clean and affordable energy and energy system. The
development and export of new technologies are supported by
Business Finland and VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland
(7.a). As for global responsibility, Finland especially supports
increasing basic access to energy for the poorest households
and a low-carbon and climate-resilient transition in developing
countries and emerging economies through its development
policy and cooperation (7.b). Since 2010, Finland, Austria and
the Nordic Development Fund have financed the Energy and
Environment Partnership operating in 15 Southern and EastAfrican countries. The goal is to increase access to energy for the
most vulnerable populations. As a result, over 5 million people
now have access to cleaner energy, 10 000 jobs have been
created and climate change mitigated by reducing 1,6 million
tons of carbon emissions. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that our per capita energy
consumption is among the highest in the world. This cannot be
deemed sustainable. Total energy consumption in Finland was
1.38 million terajoules in 2018, and this still consists 40 per cent
of fossil fuels. 
//
The transition to sustainable energy use is being hampered
by the fact that renewable energy subsidies are not allocated
on the basis of greenhouse gas impacts. Biofuels are
disproportionally subsidised, especially considering that woodbased fuels are not carbon neutral. At the same time, fossil
fuels receive higher subsidies than renewable energy, around
EUR 1 billion a year. In addition, Finland’s energy subsidies
have fluctuated due to policy changes as Governments have
changed, which interferes with consistent renewable energy
development. 
//
In Finland, wood-based fuels are the most significant
renewable energy source, with a 27 per cent share of total
energy consumption. Increased bioenergy consumption is one
reason why the felling of forests has increased over the past few
years – thus reducing Finland’s carbon sinks and affecting the
biodiversity of forest habitats. 
//
From a sustainability perspective it is problematic that 17
per cent of Finland’s total energy consumption is covered by
nuclear power. The total emissions of the production chain
of nuclear power are not low, and it is not a risk-free and
environmentally sound form of energy. 
//
Around 6 per cent of Finland’s energy is produced with
peat, but it accounts for some 12 per cent of Finland’s globalwarming emissions. 
//
From a sustainable development perspective it is important
that Finland promotes a sustainable and responsible energy
policy also internationally and at the EU level. In development
cooperation it is important to ensure that aid is not directed at
unsustainable energy projects. 
//
Finland has succeeded in increasing its renewable
energy production significantly over the past few decades.
Both technological advancement and policy measures have
contributed to this. In 2018, renewable energy sources covered
nearly 37 per cent of total energy consumption and 41 per cent
of end use in Finland. 
//
In addition, Finland has outlined policies and implemented
political measures to promote the use of renewable energy. For
example, an act prohibiting the use of coal for energy in 2029
entered into force in spring 2019. 
There is practically no energy poverty in Finland. 
//
considerably reduce its overall energy consumption: this
requires economic steering, abolishment of subsidies for
fossil energy sources and increases in taxation, as well as
incentives for improving energy efficiency and energy saving
Finland must stop the use of all fossil fuels in energy production as soon as
possible, including peat; reform its energy subsidies based on research and in a way
that is consistent with climate policy; set sustainability criteria for renewable energy that ensure
climate benefit and avoidance of other environmental
damage; ensure that investment in bioenergy production does not
risk carbon sinks or the biodiversity of forests; ensure that no fossil energy projects are funded with
development cooperation funds.
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Attac
Finland, the Finnish Association for Nature Conservation,
Finnish Development NGOs Fingo, The Siemenpuu Foundation,
Technology for Life. 
//
FINLAND HAS a Youth Guarantee in place. All young people
aged under 25 and all graduates under 30 years of age will
be guaranteed a job or work trial, traineeship, workshop,
apprenticeship or rehabilitation placement no later than three
months into the period of unemployment. (8.5, 8.6) 
//
With regard to responsible business conduct (RBC), Finland
has a strong expectation that enterprises operate responsibly
and provide decent work. (8.5, 8.7, 8.8) 
//
Finland’s challenge is that, while young people’s
employment rate has increased as a result of economic growth,
the growth is not fully reflected in youth employment. The
challenge for RBC has been to monitor the performance of
Finnish enterprises reliably, especially the global impacts
of enterprises. The Finnish labor market is segmented into
women’s and men’s occupations, which contributes to women
earning less than men. 
//
Finland has succeeded in reducing the number of those
not in employment, education or training (NEETs) and creating
a network of services providing low-threshold services.
Finland was the fourth country in the world to publish its
National Action Plan on the UN Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights. Many Finnish businesses are pioneers in
human rights issues, placing well in international sustainability
rankings. Finland has successfully implemented the UNGPs in
an inclusive manner that has moved practical activities forward
at national, EU and international levels. 
//
As for global responsibility, Finland is actively involved
in promoting the European Youth Guarantee and sharing
experiences on how to deal with youth unemployment. Finland
plays an active role in international efforts to promote RBC. Its
advocacy efforts culminated in the Business and Human Rights
Conference it organised during the Finnish Presidency of the
Council of the EU. The conference aimed to strengthen the EU’s
efforts in RBC by means such as proposing an EU Agenda for
Action on Business and Human Rights. 
//
The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment is
continuing to build up and develop the One-Stop Guidance
Centres for young people in cooperation with local
authorities. 
Finland is commissioning a study on mandatory due
diligence and the options for its implementation and a study
on the human rights impacts of enterprises and on their
management by means of the Corporate Human Rights
Benchmark methodology during 2020. 
Finland is likewise continuing human rights training courses
for enterprises and supporting the implementation of a
human rights-based approach in public funding instruments. 
A key government project ‘Career opportunities for people
with partial work ability’ was carried out from 2015 to 2019. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that the skills-based polarisation
of the labour market has deepened and the significance of
education for finding work and staying employed has increased.
Alas, some groups have increasing difficulties to become
employed, e.g. young people with only a basic qualification,
immigrants and people with disabilities. 
//
The share of the underemployed in the workforce has clearly
increased since the early 2000s due to the rise of part-time
employment. Also, the number of temporary and other atypical
forms of employment is increasing. Among people employed in
platform economy, for example, pay is low and unstable and job
security is non-existent. 
//
The social security system has not been able to keep up
with the transformation of working life. This makes it difficult
for the self-employed and other casual workers in particular
to earn a living. The system is considered overtly bureaucratic,
its services are fragmented and individuals have limited
opportunities to influence. Personal services have been reduced
and furthermore, training and coaching have been outsourced.
From the perspective of labour market sustainability, it is
alarming that competence development is concentrated on
those who already have good skills and opportunities. 
//
The pay gaps between men and women have narrowed
slowly. The uneven division of care responsibilities and
absences from work still affect women’s career development
and pay differentials. 
//
Finland has not succeeded in decoupling economic growth
from environmental degradation, as its GDP continues to be
closely linked to the consumption of raw materials and energy.
In other words, as GDP grows, emissions and the consumption
of natural resources increase as well. 
//
Finland should adopt a more ambitious role in promoting
human rights and fundamental rights in the labour market
globally as well. In particular, the human rights impacts of
business activities supported by development cooperation and
the decency of the jobs created in these activities should be
evaluated with clear-cut criteria. 
//
Finland has succeeded in increasing employment since
2016, largely due to international economic development. At
the end of 2019, the employment rate was 73.0 per cent, and
the unemployment rate among women and young people had
decreased. 
//
Working life issues and the significance of work in poverty
alleviation now feature prominently in political debate. The
employment of people with disabilities and people with partial
work ability has also gained new prominence in labour market
policy. 
//
In promoting decent work, the Government programme’s
promise to carry a study as preparation for a binding regulatory
framework on corporate responsibility is an important step
forward. At the core of this initiative is a human rights due
diligence requirements that all Finnish companies should meet
throughout their value chains. 
//
Finland must increase resources for employment services and invest in
personal services and special groups
• reform the Employment Contracts Act so that the concepts
of contract and employer are re-defined for platform
economy purposes
• immediately start tripartite preparations of legal
amendments under the Equal Pay Programme and reserve
sufficient resources for the programme
• enact an ambitious corporate responsibility legislation with
mandatory human rights due diligence, develop an indicator
for corporate responsibility for monitoring sustainable
development and promote a binding corporate social
responsibility regulation also at the EU and UN
• impose human rights and fundamental labour market rights
as a starting point of its development policy, and promote
the freedom of association, collective negotiations and living
wage in its development and trade policy
• consistently use well-being and sustainability indicators in
support of decision-making and ensure the ecological and
social sustainability of economic development. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Attac,
Changemaker, Felm, Pro Ethical Trade Finland, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, The Finnish Association of
People with Physical Disabilities, The Martha Organization,
Fairtrade Finland, International Solidarity Foundation, Finnish
Confederation of Professionals STTK, The Central Organisation
of Finnish Trade Unions SAK, The Trade Union Solidarity Centre
of Finland SASK.
//
FINLAND’S SUCCESS and international growth is based on
education and training, research and development (R&D),
technological know-how and innovations. This combined with
well-functioning basic infrastructure has created prosperity
and the conditions for socially and environmentally sustainable
growth (9.1, 9.5). Use of more digitalised solutions would
improve efficiency and benefit sustainability in production.
Finland has a good foundation to enhance the level of
digitalisation in industrial sectors but more companies should
realise the potential, acquire the skills, and implement the
digital solutions. (9.4). 
//
Finland’s challenges: Finland has seen a decline in its
position at the vanguard of research and innovation activities.
The levels of funding invested in R&D, both public and
especially private, decreased considerably between 2008 and
2018. 
//
The strengths of Finland’s innovation system include
a high level of public investment in innovation (compared
internationally), public–private innovation partnerships and a
strong start-up culture. The aim is to create environmentally,
socially and economically sustainable business and growth for
Finnish enterprises. Finland’s strengths include a solid knowhow in the utilisation of bio-based raw materials. The bio-based
materials could benefit the development of sustainability in
several global value chains. 
//
Global responsibility: Finland supports industrial sectors to
improve their sustainability and reduce their climate impacts.
Finland promotes international scaling of sustainable solutions
and innovations. Finland supports the development of
sustainable infrastructure, business and technology, as well as
inclusive and sustainable industrial development in developing
countries through development cooperation. 
//
The Finnish Government has adopted a target of raising R&D
investments from the current level of 2.7% to 4% of GDP
by 2030. For this purpose, a roadmap is being constructed
and will be completed in the spring of 2020. (9.5) Achieving
the target requires approximately doubling the public and
private R&D investments to EUR 11 million. 
The Government will cooperate with industrial sectors to
construct roadmaps to identify development paths to reduce
the climate emissions of different sectors and enterprises. 
Governmental innovation programmes run by Business
Finland and VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
sustainable solutions are developed concerning e.g. clean
energy (SDG7), circular economy (SDG8, SDG12), smart
industry (SDG9), health and well-being (SDG3), clean
technologies and low-carbon solutions (SDG13), sustainable
urbanization (SDG11), and digital solutions. Via the
aforementioned programs, innovation support is channelled
to the development of sustainable production processes,
business models, and more climate-friendly products. 40% of
innovation funding is channelled to promoting climate and
low-carbon targets. 
With an active and progressive spectrum policy, Finland is
among the world leaders in the development and use of
next-generation mobile networks. 
//
THE CHALLENGE FOR FINLAND IS that we are a resourceintensive economy that consumes a lot of raw materials. In
Finland natural resources generate on average one euro of
economic value per kilogram, whereas the EU average is two
euros. However, Finland does use particularly its renewable
resources, such as forest, in a sustainable way. 
//
In order to succeed in transitioning to a low-emission
society, we will need significant changes both in processes as
well as material and energy consumption also within trade and
industry. Currently too many innovations are improvements
within production sectors; resource efficiency is improving and
emissions decreasing, but the industries are too slow to reform
in terms of consuming operations and value chains. 
//
The transition will require investments in research,
development and innovation policy worth billions of
euros, as well as cooperation between corporations, public
administration, researchers and the civic society. In the
early 2000s Finland’s RDI policy (research, development and
innovation) was world class, but the situation has deteriorated
at an alarming rate: the level of public RDI funding has dropped
from 3.8 per cent of GDP in 2008 to just 2.71 per cent in 2019. 
Industrial sectors and consumer businesses lack consistent
indicators and impact assessment. Funding instruments
may emphasize just one sustainability area and ignore
the rest. Finland is known as a model country of digital
development, but we are at among the worst in Europe
regarding the availability of high-speed fixed internet networks.
This is threatening the equality of people and regions and
increasing digital inequality. 
//
In development cooperation, Finland is trying to balance
between promoting its own exports and the development
goals. Only a fraction of global economic growth benefits the
poorest people and nations. The use of development funds to
support Finnish companies may not be the most efficient way of
supporting the infrastructure, innovation and industrialisation
of developing countries. 
//
Finland succeeded in creating the world’s first roadmap
to a circular economy in 2016. The objective now is to bring
the circular economy to the core of competitiveness and
economic growth strategy, transition to low-carbon energy,
start considering natural resources as a scarcity and promote
the shift to a sustainable lifestyle. 
//
The significance of innovation ecosystems in promoting
circular economy and resource-wise solutions has been
understood, and Finland already has several functioning circular
economy ecosystems. Industrial material flows are at the heart
of a circular economy, but circular economy has also started to
be featured in consumer business and in urban centres. Urbanrural cooperation also has great significance, for example in the
use and production of biogas. 
//
The maintenance backlog of transport infrastructure
assets has been significantly cleared over the past few years.
The backlog has been reduced throughout the country: this
improves accessibility, transport of people and economic
development. 
//
Finland has supported infrastructures, sustainable industry
and innovation in developing countries, for example using
programme funding and investments via Finnfund, BEAMBusiness with impact, and Finnpartnership. Through bilateral
SAIS 1–2 programmes Finland has specifically funded the
innovation ecosystem, training and entrepreneurship in
Southern Africa. 
//
Finland must  
• link sustainable development impact assessment to
the criteria of public innovation funding and to public
procurement
• reform the Mining Act so that it is sustainable both in terms
of the environment and social impacts
• hold on to its target of raising public RDI funding to 4 per
cent of GDP by 2030
• provide increasingly solid support for innovation activities
and the industrial structure in developing countries as part
of the development and trade policy
• ensure access to functional transport and network
connections throughout the country. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Dodo, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, The Central Union of Agricultural
Producers and Forest Owners (MTK), The Central Organisation of
Finnish Trade Unions (SAK) and Technology for Life.
//
PEOPLE’S POLITICAL AND SOCIAL RIGHTS are realised
particularly effectively in Finland and other Nordic countries.
Respect for democracy, rule of law and fundamental and
human rights create a solid foundation for the welfare
approach. However, the differentiation of participation and
political influence reflects the widening social gaps in broader
terms. 
//
Finland’s challenges: Increasing inequalities and social
exclusion seem to accumulate and extend across generations.
Although experiences of discrimination in Finland have
declined slightly at the level of the whole population since 2015
(18% > 16%), research shows that individuals from minority
backgrounds have a higher risk of facing discrimination than
the rest of the population. Young people’s life satisfaction has
taken a downward turn, although the majority (85%) are still
satisfied with their lives. The average time to process asylum
applications has dropped from 350 to 244 days since 2016.
There are still challenges with implementation of removal
orders. 
//
Finland has succeeded in developing legislation and
practices in a direction that emphasises equality and prevents
discrimination. All public authorities are obliged to assess their
operations in terms of realisation of equality and to draw up a
plan to promote equality. The same obligation also applies to
educational institutions and employers that regularly employ
over 30 people. The number of homeless people has declined
as a result of extensive programmes implemented in Finland to
reduce homelessness. Voter turnout in the 2019 Parliamentary
election rose to 72%, which was the highest level since the
Parliamentary election of 1991. Citizens’ initiatives and other
forms of participatory democracy have improved democracy
and increased participation in society. 
//
Finland supports several international NGOs involved in
advocacy efforts in the field of non-discrimination at global,
national and regional levels, including the Minority Rights
Group (MRG) and the Centre for Economic and Social Rights
(CESR). Finnish disability organisations involved in development
cooperation and their partners in developing countries are
important allies for Finland, especially including the Abilis
Foundation and Disability Partnership Finland. Finland has
supported the work of the Special Rapporteur on Extreme
Poverty and Human Rights from 2015 to 2020. 
//
Finland’s non-discrimination legislation was reformed in
2015, resulting in considerable improvements in legal
safeguards available for victims of discrimination while
reinforcing the obligation to promote equality. 
Democracy and fundamental and human rights were
promoted through two government-level action plans
running from 2017 to 2019, in order to encourage equal
participation and develop monitoring of discrimination, etc. 
A key government project disseminated evidence-based
good operating models to promote health and wellbeing
and to reduce inequalities (incl. vulnerable groups). 
Finland’s 2018 migration policy guidelines especially
promote labour migration, integration to support this, and
good relations between people from different groups. 
//
SOME PEOPLE EXPERIENCE INCREASED INEQUALITY IN
FINLAND. The disparities in income and wealth ceased growing
in the 2000s, but from 2015 to 2019 changes in current income
redistribution and taxation have favoured those in higher
income brackets. The development will turn around in 2020, but
this will only partially cancel out previous cuts. Index cuts and
freezes of benefits, higher tax rates on benefits, reducing the
share of rent covered by housing allowance and the “activation
model” have contributed to inequality among the unemployed,
families with children and students in particular. In addition,
health care client fees rose by 40 per cent in 2015–2016, which
increased recovery proceedings arising from these fees by
50 per cent; in 2019 more than 457 000 payments were subject
to debt recovery. The new Alcohol Act (2017) increased the
availability of alcohol, and the negative repercussions are
felt especially in the low-income bracket, among the poorly
qualified and long-term unemployed. 
//
The availability of some health and social services has
improved, but there are major differences between services and
regions. There are issues particularly in the services for people in
vulnerable situations, including child protection, mental health
services and alcohol and drug rehabilitation. The burdens on
families with children (economic, mental health, substance
abuse) tend to accumulate. In addition, significant population
groups miss out on digital services; there is inequality
between employed and unemployed people regarding health
care services, and there are gaps in the labour market and
employment services. 
//
Gender inequality is evident in the lower income level
among women (with women with disabilities earning the
least), the proportional increase of homelessness among
women, gaps in the rights of female inmates and the difficulty
in reducing violence against women. Groups which deviate in
any way from the mainstream population experience inequality.
The employment rate of immigrants is lower than of others,
with discrimination and hate speech also making life more
difficult. People’s finances and background influence their
social inclusion. Voter turnout among the highly educated is
higher than among those with a basic level of education, and
immigration background reduces the likelihood of political
participation. 
//
The Government Programme recognises the inequality of
the international system, the need to reinforce the position of
developing countries and the significance of taxation in funding
sustainable development. However, the Programme does not
clearly state that Finland should actively strive to strengthen
the role of UN in particular in reaching an agreement on
international taxation and preventing tax avoidance. 
//
Finland has shortened waiting lists for specialised
medical care, combatted homelessness and raised the age
limit of aftercare services in child protection to 25 years. Prime
Minister Sanna Marin’s Government has made or is about to
make positive national changes in areas, including: children’s
subjective right to daycare, removal of the “activity model” for
the unemployed, raising of benefits, introduction of a minimum
required carer per client rate for care homes, mental health
strategy, substance abuse and addiction strategy, family leave
practices, a democracy programme, prevention of violence
against women, transgender legislation, health and social
services and social security services, gender budgeting, digital
skills support, increase in the compulsory school age and
free upper secondary education. In taxation, Finland used its
presidency of the Council of the EU to promote public countryby-country reporting (CBCR) in the EU and prepared a new
national action plan on taxation and development. 
//
Finland must 
• continue increasing the level of basic social security and
create an accessible and flexible social security system.
• reinforce cooperation between authorities and with CSOs
to comprehensively take into account the needs of the
marginalised and special groups, including children.
• develop health and social services and employment services
with focus on the customer.
• strengthen gender awareness, e.g. in budgeting and
employment support measures.
• use trade, tax and development policy to reinforce the
fairness of multilateral systems. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Attac
Finland, Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions SAK, EHYT
Finnish Association for Substance Abuse Prevention, Felm,
Finnish association of people with physical disabilities, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, Finnish Foundation for Supporting
Ex-Offenders, Finnish National Organisation of the Unemployed,
SOSTE Finnish Federation for Social Affairs and Health. 
//

FINLAND AIMS to ensure sustainable urban development
through legislative, policy and practical measures especially
in the fields of housing, land use, construction and transport.
Finland’s national strategy aims to reduce the building stock’s
emissions by 90 per cent by 2050. 
//
Challenges for Finland include achieving a comprehensive
broadly supported approach to sustainable cities and human
settlements. Finland is striving towards a polycentric regional
policy and structure, which utilises the strengths and resources
of different parts of the country. At the core of this policy are 1)
increasing density in growing urban areas and, 2) developing
peri-urban and rural areas according to their needs. 
//
Finland has succeeded in strengthening an approach to
policy and planning in which key sectors, such as land use,
housing and transportation are planned in a holistic manner
in order to ensure sufficient density, energy efficiency,
affordability, accessibility and sustainability of the built
environment. National, and especially regional, development
planning is well established in Finland, covering both urban and
rural areas. 
//
For over a decade, Finland has implemented a national
strategy to reduce homelessness, and the number of homeless
persons has continuously decreased over the last five years.
Practically all housing in urban areas in Finland is adequate but,
due to price levels, affordability has not always been sufficient
in the largest city regions. 
//
Finland is a member of the United Nations Habitat Assembly
and active participant at the World Urban Forum. Finnish
Government leads Sustainable Buildings and Construction
(SBC) programme under UN Environment 10 Year Framework of
Programmes on sustainable consumption and production. 
//
Following Habitat III, as part of our 2030 Agenda
Implementation Plan, Finland has put in place a National
Action Plan for Sustainable Urban Development.
The goals of the National Cultural Environment Strategy
(2014–2020) have been achieved.  
Finland supports integrated planning through “Agreements
of Intent” between the Government and major cities. In these
metropolitan areas agree to increase the density of cities and
construct more public housing. In turn, the state allocates
investments to public transport infrastructure. 
Finland has launched a roadmap in 2017 for establishing low
carbon building legislation by 2025, based on limit values for
life cycle carbon footprints of different building types in new
building. 
The Wood Building Program promotes the use of wood in
urban development as an effective way to reduce the carbon
footprint of the construction industry. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that its population is predicted
to concentrate around three urban centres – Helsinki, Tampere
and Turku. Remote areas are threatened by weakening public
services and transport connections. In a large part of the
country, the value of real estate is in decline and construction
debt is on the rise, while other areas suffer from a housing
shortage. The current situation is unsustainable. 
//
The population is ageing, and the target is to enable 92 per
cent of over 75-year-olds to continue living at home. Up to a
million homes need to be refurbished to meet the needs of
ageing occupants, and accessibility must be increased both in
new construction and renovations. Standards of construction
have been updated and the state grants assistance for
reconstruction and housing for special needs groups, but it
remains to be seen if these measures are sufficient. 
//
Systemic fragility has increased in Finland. Climate change
increases the need to prepare for direct risks, such as flooding
and storms. Global catastrophes cause indirect risks, such as
changes in food and energy security. Until now these risks have
not been anticipated and prevented by sufficiently concrete
measures to guarantee society’s equilibrium and security of
supply in exceptional circumstances. Internationally Finland
needs to prevent the eruption of crises by supporting the
resilience of local societies and by promoting sustainable
construction in developing countries, including through
development cooperation. 
//
Finland has succeeded in paying more attention to the
circular economy and carbon neutrality in construction, urban
planning and waste processing. The increase in municipal waste
recycling has come to a halt, though, and requires additional
measures. The attainment of circular economy targets in the
built environment is hampered by the slowness of change
in the sector. Finland is aiming to close nutrient cycles, i.e. to
recycle organic waste as fertiliser. Practical measures have been
taken in the cooperation networks of agricultural and other
operators and in new residential areas, but the implementation
is still in its infancy. 
//
Investments have been made in the increase of rail transport
and bicycle and pedestrian traffic, and the number of journeys
made by rail transport increased by 13 per cent in 2015–2018. 
The Helsinki metro expanded westwards, slightly reducing
vehicle traffic into the city. Other rail projects are currently
underway, including the Tampere tramway. To support bicycle
and pedestrian traffic, many cities have introduced bikeshare
schemes. The investment in other public transport and energyefficient solutions, such as biogas buses, has been insufficient.
The development in accessibility is positive: fleets, platforms
and ticket pricing have been updated with attention to special
groups. 
//
Municipal participation opportunities for local residents have
improved. Attention has been paid to equality of participation,
but there is still room for improvement. Urban district and
village activities have gained in popularity in the 2000s, which
has promoted a sense of belonging, alongside urban activism. 
//
Finland must  
utilise the digital transformation to increase work
opportunities which are not tied to a location in various
regions of the country.
carry out the traffic fuel reform in a sustainable and diverse
way by promoting the use of electricity and biogas in public
transportation and passenger traffic.
ensure availability of participation and services, accessibility
and age-friendliness of the built environment to secure
equality.
set the closing of nutrient cycles as a target in industries,
housing, agriculture and waste management.
promote resource wisdom and sustainability of communities
in crisis situations by expanding the models of sharing
economy.
ensure that urban planning secures balanced infill
development, land use revisions and accessibility of green
areas.
anticipate risks by investing in climate change mitigation,
tying up carbon dioxide emissions, taking responsibility
for outsourced emissions, transferring assets to carbonfree investments and supporting fragile communities and
communities affected by the climate change. //

Organisations participating in this assessment: Dodo, the
Finnish Association of People with Physical Disabilities, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, the Finnish Village Movement
Association, Ukumbi. 
//

ECOLOGICAL FOOTPRINT OF FINLAND is more than three
times larger than the global average and our consumption
has negative effects abroad. However, Finland has been one
of the pioneers in the field of sustainable consumption and
production and has adopted SCP strategies and action plans
since 2005. 
//
Challenges for Finland are a high raw material footprint
and difficulties in reaching targets set for recycling of waste. In
Finland, the consumption of raw materials is notably high both
in relation to gross domestic product and per capita. Finland
is an energy- and material-intensive country due to its climate,
geography and large-scale intensive exporting metal and forest
industries. 
//
Finland has succeeded in both reducing emissions and
catalyzing innovations especially by combining economic
incentives and legislation as well as promoting circular
economy. Public procurement system is being actively
developed to promote strategic goals in environmental
policy and innovation. Finnish companies have been active
in developing tools to improve their responsibility and
sustainability. The State and the business sector have also
negotiated voluntary agreements (Green deals) to take joint
action by seeking solutions to mitigate climate change and
promote a circular economy. 
//
Finland has taken global responsibility by co-leading the
One Planet Network Programme on Sustainable Buildings and
Construction Programme (SBC). Finland has also been active
in the Partnership for Action on Green Economy (PAGE) UN-led
network to assist countries in actions on green economy.  
Finland wants to be carbon neutral by 2035 and carbon
negative soon after that. The goal is to reduce the carbon
footprint of consumption by an average of 50% by the year
2030 according to the Medium-term Climate Change Policy
Plan for 2030. 
//
Establishment of a network-based centre of excellence on
public procurement (KEINO). The purpose of the hub is
to increase ambition and expertise as well as to improve
sustainability and innovation in public procurement. 
The material-efficiency programme focuses on creating
industrial symbiosis to build partnerships and new business
opportunities. The Government has made a materials
efficiency agreement with the Finnish food industry, and
trade and packaging sectors to reduce the environmental
impacts of food production, distribution and consumption in
2019–2021.
//
 National plastic roadmap presents a set of key actions to find
solutions to reduce, refuse, recycle and replace plastics. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that our consumption of natural
resources per capita is among the highest globally. Finland’s
economy is closely tied in with the consumption of raw
materials and energy. The economy produced 0.21 kg of carbon
dioxide per EUR 1 of GDP, more than double that of Sweden or
Switzerland. 
//
The average material footprint among Finns is over 40 000 kg
per person a year, and the trend is rising. A sustainable, globally
just level would be around one fifth of current footprint. The
amount of municipal waste generated by Finns also increased in
2018 by about 8 per cent on the year before. Finns generated on
average 550 kg of waste per person. 
// 
Finland has promised to halve its food waste by 2030. This
is a welcome policy, since Finns waste 400 million kilograms of
edible food a year. 
//
The enormous consumption of natural resources and the
amount of waste generated are at odds with the ambitious
circular economy targets. Finland lacks a comprehensive plan
on how to achieve sustainable level of material use. Finland
does not, for example, monitor the key figures indicating the
material efficiency of its economy other than the aggregating
DMC indicator, and only fragmented data is available on the
global environmental impact of Finnish consumption. 
//
Finland has not phased out subsidies for fossil fuels or to
environmentally harmful business operations. 
//
Finland’s total public procurement amounts to around EUR
35 billion a year, and an increasing share of municipal budgets
is spent on procurement. However, very few municipalities
manage procurement in a way that would promote the
municipality’s sustainable development goals. 
//
Finland has succeeded in its target of drafting a roadmap
for a circular economy in 2016 and a complementary circular
economy action plan. The roadmap sets the target of Finland
being a leading nation in circular economy by 2025. 
//
From a sustainable production and consumption perspective
it is also promising that Finland is currently preparing corporate
responsibility legislation that would include human rights due
diligence obligations. 
//
Finland must 
prepare a concrete plan of action on how we are to transition
to a carbon-neutral circular economy
monitor and reduce emissions resulting from Finnish
consumption and other cross-border environmental impacts
from consumption
carry out public procurement processes applying the
guiding principle of impact on society, sustainable
development and human rights compliance, including
accessibility of products and services to people with
disabilities.
encourage people to eat climate-friendly and ecological
food and pay attention to the entire production chain in the
assessment of the environmental impacts of food
find concrete measures in the food waste roadmap, prepared
under the direction of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Forestry, to get all operators in the food system to reduce
waste
phase out all subsidies to fossil fuels and environmentally
harmful operations. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Attac,
Changemaker, Pro Ethical Trade Finland, Felm, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, The Finnish Association of People
with Physical Disabilities, The Consumers’ Union of Finland, The
Central Union of Agricultural Producers and Forest Owners, The
Martha Organization, Fairtrade Finland, International Solidarity
Foundation, Finnish Confederation of Professionals STTK, The
Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions SAK. 
//
FINLAND AIMS to be climate neutral by 2035. The Government
is updating national climate legislation and the national 2050
target, which is currently an 80 % reduction in Green House
Gas (GHG) emissions compared to the 1990 level, to reflect the
climate-neutrality target. Total GHG emissions in 2018 were 21%
lower than in 1990. 
//
The biggest challenge for Finland is to achieve a rapid
reduction of GHG emissions. According to Statistics Finland’s
preliminary data, the total GHG emissions in 2018 (56.4 million
t CO2 eq.) declined 3% compared to 2016. However, compared
to 2017 the emissions in 2018 grew by 2%, mostly due to
increased consumption of natural gas and peat. The net sink
of the LULUCF sector varies on an annual basis due to fellings
and it has been between 9.8–21.3 million tons CO2 between
2014–2018. In 2018 the net sink was 43 % lower than in 2017.
According to the 2019 interim review of the implementation of
the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan, climate-related
risk management is still partly lacking as some sectors are only
beginning to plan adaptation actions and capacities to address
climate-related risks vary significantly across sectors and levels
of implementation. 
//
 Finland has succeeded in increasing the use of renewable
energy throughout the 2010s, and had the second-highest share
of renewable energy in Europe in 2017 and in 2018. 41 % of final
energy consumption was covered with renewables in 2018. The
use of coal for energy will be phased out by May 2029. 
//
As for Finland’s global responsibility, Finland supports
developing countries’ climate measures as part of its
development cooperation. In this context, Finland provided
EUR 46,6 million of climate finance to developing countries
in 2018. To catalyse investments for climate-smart projects in
developing countries, Finland decided in 2017 to channel EUR
114 million into the Finland–International Finance Corporation
Climate Change Programme. Finland aims to support the Green
Climate Fund with EUR 100 million in 2020–2023. 
//
However, regarding the Finnish footprint, consumptionbased GHG emissions have not declined in 2000s. The Finnish
Innovation Fund Sitra estimates that Finns need to halve
their carbon footprint to avoid over-consumption of natural
resources. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that our emissions are far from
a sustainable and globally justified level, and the direction is
alarming: in 2018, the total greenhouse gas emissions increased
by two per cent on the previous year. 
//
Finnish accounting of greenhouse gas emissions do not
consider the impact of Finnish consumption beyond its national
borders. In 2015, these consumption-based emissions were one
third higher that those emitted from Finland. In 2018, Finland’s
carbon sink fell more than 40 per cent from the previous year
due to record levels of felling. 
//
Finland has much to improve in regard its climate finance.
The allocation of finance lacks clear criteria and openness.
Finland’s fair share of the USD 100 billion commitment to
climate finance agreed in the Paris Agreement would be at least
USD 200 million a year, but the mobilized finance has been less
than half of this in the past few years. 
//
Predictable public grant-based finance must form the
foundation for Finland’s climate finance; currently the focus
is on the private sector and on market-based instruments.
The finances cannot be regarded as “new or additional”, since
climate finance is reported under development finance. 
//
Finance for purposes that are harmful for the climate has not
been phased out, and Finland continues to fund fossil energy
sources from its development finance. Finance is also not being
targeted equally at mitigation and adaptation. 
//
Climate policy generates well-being, livelihoods and decent
work only if the transition to a climate resilient society can be
executed fairly, without leaving any groups behind and while
paying special attention to vulnerable groups. Climate change
will particularly affect the lives of children and young people,
but they have not been proactively listened to or taken into
account as a particularly vulnerable target group. 
//
Climate change mitigation, impacts and adaptation should
be included in school curricula and basic foundations at all
levels of education. 
//
Finland has succeeded in climate action most notably by
enacting an act that bans the use of coal by 2029. The emissions
have declined over the long term, however, in 2016–2018
emissions have increased. 
//
Climate activism (Climate Move) had an impact on the
programmes and outcome of the 2019 Parliamentary elections
and through this on the Government Programme. However,
only the implementation of the Programme will show whether
Finland is able to succeed in its carbon neutrality target by 2035. 
//
Finland must 
limit its emissions in line with the more ambitious target of
1.5ºC and set targets for its carbon sinks that would allow it
to achieve carbon neutrality before 2035
phase out all subsidies for fossil fuels and activities that are
harmful for the climate, and raise taxation of peat to match
that of other fossil fuels
address the carbon footprint of consumption by providing
informative guidance, financial incentives and legislative and
taxation-based steering
oblige Government-owned companies to align their
operations with the 1.5ºC target
incorporate the principles of a just transition into legislation
and into national, regional and sector-specific climate and
energy strategies mobilize at least EUR 200 million a year to global climate
finance and distribute this evenly between adaptation and
mitigation. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Attac Finland,
Felm, the Finnish Association for Nature Conservation, Finnish
Committee for UNICEF, Finnish Development NGOs Fingo, Plan
International Finland, the Siemenpuu Foundation, Technology
for Life. 
//
FINLAND WORKS actively both nationally and internationally
to achieve a clean and healthy Baltic Sea and to improve
protection of ocean ecosystems globally. Although progress has
been made goals have not been fully achieved yet. 
//
For Finland a continuing challenge is excess loading of
phosphorus, nitrogen and organic matter from land-based
sources. This has resulted in large-scale eutrophication. Since
the 1970s, Finland has been able to significantly cut the loads
of nutrients from urban and industrial point sources but diffuse
loading, especially from agriculture, remains a great challenge.
Even though marine protected areas, provide protection for
a limited number of species and habitats, many previously
common habitats have become endangered and most
protected areas lack a management plan. 
//
Finland has succeeded in finding new methods to tackle
marine pollution. The Government has during the recent
years provided extra funding for development and piloting of
innovative methods to reduce nutrient loading and to protect
the marine environment. New methods, such as the spreading
of gypsum on farmland to bind phosphorus in the soil, have
been successful for quick reduction of losses of phosphorus. The
coverage of marine protected areas in the Finnish marine areas
has increased from 9.9 % in 2016 to 11.1 % in 2019 and Finland
has achieved the 10 % target. Finland has a national marine
strategy with a programme of measures for protection of the
marine environment. 
//
In terms of global responsibility Finland cooperates on
marine protection with other Baltic Sea coastal countries and
the EU under the umbrella of HELCOM and is active in global
cooperation for the health of oceans. Finland advocates stricter
IMO regulation of emissions from shipping to air and water and
is taking measures to improve the waste management of ships. 
//
Maximum levels for annual land-based loading have been
set as part of Finland’s marine strategy. In 2016–2019, the
Government invested approximately EUR 40 million of
extra funding to improve the status of the marine and fresh
waters. In 2020–2023, investments are planned to continue
and be total EUR 69 million. 
Plastics Roadmap for Finland was launched in 2018 to reduce
losses of plastics to the environment. 
To implement the national maritime policy guidelines,
Finland has in 2016–2019 actively contributed to global level
work for improving the status of oceans and seas, e.g. in
processes under the UNCLOS, UN Regional Seas Programme
inter alia during Finland’s EU Presidency and the UNEA/UNEP. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that eutrophication is alarmingly
high in many areas of the Baltic Sea, and the state of coastal
waters is only moderate or bad. The target of healthy oceans
will not be achieved by 2020, and it is being issued a new
deadline of 2027. 
//
The nutrient load from agriculture is still high. In addition,
the State continues to subsidise peat production even
though peat harvesting and the associated particle loads
on watercourses accelerate eutrophication of watercourses,
increase turbidity of the water, accelerate the growth of aquatic
plants and algae, cause siltation and increase the dominance of
fish in the carp family in the fish stock. 
//
Clear cutting of forests has increased, and associated tilling
of soil increases the amount of nutrients and solids ending
up in watercourses with runoff. Clear cutting contributes to
eutrophication of watercourses, turbidity of waters, oxygen
depletion in waters and leaching of mercury, which is toxic for
aquatic organisms, into watercourses. 
//
Among Finland’s 75 fish species, 12 are endangered, many
of these marine species. In addition, data of seven species is
deficient. Invasive alien species have reproduced in the Baltic
Sea, and they are displacing endemic species. 
//
Fishing quotas are too high at the EU level with regard to
several species. Although Finland has called for scientifically
based quotas, the quotas have not been adjusted accordingly.
Earlier start of commercial salmon fishing in the Gulf of Bothnia
also threatens Finland’s salmon stocks. 
//
Microplastics and their accumulation in organisms is
recognised as a new threat. 
//
Finland has succeeded in its target, for example by
complementing the Natura 2000 network in 2018 with three
valuable marine ecosystem regions. In a three-year spearhead
project, Regeneration of migratory and endangered fish
stocks, fish stocks were regenerated in collaboration with local
parties, and the decision was made to earmark a larger sum
to improving the living conditions of migratory fish species in
2019. 
//
A significant penalty is now imposed on anyone caught
illegally fishing declining or endangered fish species, and at
the EU level Finland has promoted scientifically sustainable
regulation of fishing. 
//
The Ministry of the Environment has funded projects that
implement and support the Marine protection programmes
with approximately EUR 8 million. The target of several
projects was to reduce the nutrient loads leaching from land to
watercourses. In terms of eutrophication, the state of the Gulf of
Finland has improved due to reduced point source loading.
//
The water protection promotion programme was launched
in 2019, and the Government assigned EUR 69 million of
funding to it in 2019–2023. To support marine spatial planning,
data has been gathered on local conservation values and
statuses. The findings of the Finnish Inventory Programme for
the Underwater Marine Environment, VELMU, are utilised as
basis for planning work, for example in the “Meriavain” project
that aims to generate data on the location, number and quality
of key marine habitats. 
//
Finland has a successful bottle deposit and return system
that helps to reduce the amount of plastic waste in the sea.
Plastic recycling has also been improved. 
//
Finland must 
• update its Water and Environmental Protection Acts so that
they meet the Water Framework Directive requirements in
compliance with the polluter pays principle
• cease clear cutting in state-owned lands
• target agricultural subsidies more effectively to activities
that prevent eutrophication of watercourses
• steer eating habits more strongly towards vegetarian food
and support the use of sustainable Baltic Sea fish as food
• ban smoking on beaches, as cigarette butts are the most
prevalent type of waste in seas and on beaches
• continue restoring fishways and expand fishway obligations
in licences. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, The Finnish Nature. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE is to halt the loss of biodiversity.
Based on the Red List Index, the species that are becoming
threatened at the fastest rate include those found in alpine,
mire and aquatic habitats. The change has been lowest in
traditional rural biotopes and other cultural habitats and in
forests. At the same time, however, most threatened species
live in forests and traditional rural biotopes. Halting the loss
requires increasing awareness and know-how of the means to
protect biodiversity among forest owners and professionals
and targeting the relevant measures cost-effectively as well as
additional resources. 
//
Finland has succeeded in mainstreaming biodiversity
protection as part of the sustainable use and management
of forests at the level of legislation, strategies and
recommendations. Finland’s strengths include a good
knowledge base on forests and nature and distribution of this
information as well as cooperation between administrative
branches, researchers and practitioners. 
//
The measures included in the Rural Development
Programme for Mainland Finland 2014–2020 have promoted
the management of endangered traditional rural biotopes,
maintained wetlands established in agricultural areas,
established various grasslands to support biodiversity, and
protected the genetic resources of farmed animals and crop
varieties. 
//
Finland finances through ODA several international
organization’s such as FAO, GEF, UNEP and IUCN and projects in
the field of protection of biodiversity and sustainable natural
resources and forest management actively participates in
international conventions such as CBD, CCD and UNFF. The use
of imported fossil resources contribute to the climate change
and the global destruction of habitats. 
//
The National Forest Strategy and METSO programme have
contributed to safeguarding biodiversity measures into
practice and developing awareness and know-how. 
The Rural Development Programme for Mainland Finland
2014–2020 and greening measures under the EU common
agricultural policy have contributed to safeguarding
agricultural biodiversity. 
Finland has been active in the implementation The Finnish
National Biodiversity Strategy and National Action Plan
(NBSAP) including protection, sustainable use and the fair
and equitable sharing of benefits of genetic resources. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS the persistent loss of biodiversity.
The 2020 target to halt the loss of biodiversity will not be
attained in Finland, as is also the case elsewhere. 
//
It has been estimated that around 48 per cent of Finland’s
400 habitat types are threatened. The most threatened
habitat types are traditional semi-natural grasslands (100%)
and forest biotopes (76%). Factors threatening them include
forestry, drainage, clearing of land for arable land, construction,
eutrophication of watercourses and climate change. 
//
The area of protected forest land and poorly productive
forest is 13 per cent in the whole of Finland, but only 5 per
cent in Southern Finland. The Forest Act was updated in 2014,
which according to the Natural Resources Institute Finland,
led to a reduction in surface area of the habitats of special
importance as defined in the Act by 27 000 hectares. This has a
direct negative impact on biodiversity, but the actual impacts
of the changes on the forest nature require more detailed
study. Average annual felling volume increased in 2016–2019,
and 2018 was a record year. A Government report found that
water pollution due to forestry was significantly higher than
previously expected. 
//
In the Land Use and Building Act, the option to impose a
requirement for a landscape work permit for forestry lands
within new local master plans was removed. The option had
been used, for example, to secure valuable biotopes or valuable
landscapes, which is why environmental organisations consider
this change in the Act a loss. An amendment was made to
the Mining Act in 2019 that allows environmental impact
assessments to be carried out later than before in some cases.
Under the 2019 Government Programme one of the premises in
the Mining Act reform is to improve the level of environmental
protection. 
//
The distribution of invasive alien species has increased.
The prevention of invasive alien species has largely been
managed by the initiatives of environmental organizations and
volunteers. 
//
Finland has succeeded in making biodiversity a topic
of public debate. Funding cuts, however, impaired nature
conservation work. The 2019 Government Programme pledges
a change for the better. Biodiversity has also been promoted
through EU Life funding. 
//
The Luontolahjani satavuotiaalle campaign marking
the centenary of Finland’s independence amassed more
than 8 000 hectares of new conservation areas from private
landowners, municipalities and the state. A new national
park was established in Hossa to protect old-growth forests.
A complementary programme for protection of mires was
implemented in state-owned lands. 
//
The implementation of the Forest Biodiversity Programme
for Southern Finland (2014–2025) continued. The programme
is based on voluntary forest conservation and nature
management by landowners. Consideration of biodiversity
of managed forests has also been promoted through the
Monimetsä project, through forest certification and by updating
forest management guidelines. 
//
The Endangered Species Protection Programme was
completed in 2017. Yet, shortage of funding has restricted its
implementation, and species’ endangerment has continued. 
There was an experiment of licensed wolf hunting, but this was
terminated in 2016 after the stock declined. The protection of
the Saimaa ringed seal stands as a positive example. 
//
Finland must 
• fund and promote research to support legislation and
sustainable land use.
• maintain and increase funding for nature conservation
• ensure that authorities have sufficient resources and
promote the cooperation of licensing, monitoring and
advisory services.
• promote active nature management and restoration.
• take biodiversity and environmental protection into
account, in compliance with the Government Programme, in
legislative reforms.
• work towards having EU funds take into account EU
protection targets and the European Green Deal and
support the sustainable use of natural resources and nature
conservation.
• maintain the purity of arable land and forest land at its
current good level. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: The Central
Union of Agricultural Producers and Forest Owners MTK,
the Finnish Association for Nature Conservation, Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, WWF Finland. 
//
A STABLE AND EFFECTIVE SOCIETY creates a good
foundation for implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals in Finland. Finland is one of the safest countries in the
world. We also excel at international rankings measuring the
level of corruption, freedom of the press, or trust in authorities
and the legal system. 
//
Finland’s challenge is the fact that although most people
are faring well and feel safe and able to participate in society,
insecurity and deprivation accumulate for certain population
groups. By way of example, violent crime and its gross forms,
in particular, concentrate in a relatively small group of socially
excluded substance abusers, who also run a manifold risk
of becoming victims of violence when compared with the
mainstream of the population. Violence perpetration and
victimisation are most prevalent among younger age groups.
The numbers of assault offences recorded by the police have
remained stable in recent years. Physical violence, including
at least a slap, had been experienced by six per cent of people
aged 15 to 74. An almost uninterrupted 20-year period of
declining homicide rates came to an end as the number of
homicides increased by 28% on the previous year. 
//
The sectors at risk of corruption in Finland include public
procurement, construction and urban planning, as well as
political decision-making and financing. The forms of structural
corruption are not reflected in international statistics, such as
the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index,
which ranks Finland high (third place in 2019). 
Finland has succeeded in improving services for crime
victims by means such as establishing Seri Support Centres for
sexual assault victims and shelter places for domestic violence
victims. Furthermore, various multidisciplinary operating
models (such as MARAC and Anchor) have been developed
and disseminated to help domestic violence victims and break
juvenile offenders’ downward spiral of crime. 
In recent years, Finland has successfully advanced anticorruption measures, such as increasing awareness at the
national level, and leading an anti-corruption campaign.
//
Finland has succeeded in halting the decline in voter
turnout. Voter turnout in the 2019 parliamentary election rose
to 72%, which was the highest level since the parliamentary
election of 1991. Citizens’ initiatives and other forms of
participatory democracy have improved democracy and
increased participation in society. 
//
As for global responsibility, one of the four priorities of
Finland’s development policy comprises peace-building and
reinforcing effective and democratic societies. The work to
develop effective societies is based on a broad democracy
concept, where promoting human rights, rule of law, good
governance and freedom of speech, eradicating corruption
and empowering citizens’ participation are considered key to
reinforce democracy. 
//
Furthermore, Finland has supported the development of
legal systems in weak states by means such as training police
officers and judges in civilian crisis management operations. 
The number of participants Finland sends to civilian crisis
management operations is the highest of all EU countries
relative to its population size. 
//
The Finnish Government published a Report on Internal
Security in 2016 and an Internal Security Strategy in October
2017. 
• A new Action Plan for the Prevention of Violence against
Children, entitled Non-Violent Childhoods, was published in
November 2019. 
• Based on the Government Programme, Finland is carrying
out a comprehensive reform of legislation governing
sexual offences, where one of the tasks is to review the
provisions on and scales of penalties for sexual offences, thus
reinforcing children’s criminal-law protection against sexual
abuse and other sexual offences. 
• Finland’s non-discrimination legislation was reformed in
2015. The realisation of fundamental and human rights was
promoted through the National Action Plan on Fundamental
and Human Rights 2017–2019. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that social polarisation has
increased, and there is an increase in hate speech particularly
targeting asylum seekers and Muslims. There is also an increase
in online bullying, hate speech and sexual grooming by
strangers targeting children. Among 9th graders, 10 per cent
have experienced violent threats. 
//
To implement the Istanbul Convention, Finland has been
urged to promptly implement clear procedures and guidelines
for the protection of women and girls. 
//
Privacy protection for citizens was narrowed down through
new civilian intelligence legislation which took effect in 2019,
as it is possible that screening could leave large amounts of the
communications of individual citizens in the possession of the
authorities. 
//
Finnish companies exported weapons to countries which
participate in wars or which violate human rights according to
international reports. 
//
The UN Human Rights Committee and Human Rights Council
have repeatedly paid attention to the position of total objectors
who refuse all military service in Finland, and the Human Rights
Council has urged Finland to ensure that the alternative civilian
service option is strictly managed by civilians.  
//
Finland has actively promoted the implementation of
the UN Security Council resolution 1325 – Women, peace
and security – in international arenas, and is among the first
countries to start preparing a national implementation plan
regarding resolution 2250 – Youth, peace and security. Young
people and youth CSOs have taken ownership of the process.
//
In its foreign policy, Finland has emphasised conflict
prevention, mediation, dialogue processes and addressing
the root causes of conflicts. These targets have been partially
implemented. In the Defence Report, Finland sets the
development of national defence capability as the objective of
its participation in crisis management operations. The proposed
increase of the appropriation for peace mediation work in
2019 was a long overdue step in the right direction. Finland
consistently highlighted the rule of law in dialogue during its
EU Presidency in the second half of 2019. 
//
In fragile states Finnish actors have supported the rights and
participation of women, children, young people and people
with disabilities, as well as gender equality. 
//
The Parliament approved the amendment of the NonMilitary Service Act on 1 March 2019. In future, all reservist
objectors who had been approved for supplementary service
are automatically exempted from military service. 
//
prepare a peace policy programme to lessen hate speech
and to transform a culture of violence into a culture of peace.
• prepare an implementation plan for the Lanzarote
Convention that will cover the convention’s entire content.
• better protect undocumented children and ensure that they
receive the educational and health care services they are
entitled to.
• end the export of weapons and military equipment to
countries at war.
• cut military expenses to mitigate for and adapt to the climate
change and direct the funds nationally and internationally
to the most impoverished individuals and to the poorest
countries.
• support the creation of new peace mediation models by
bringing together multilateral, private sector and CSO actors
and by promoting multi-actor projects and programmes.
• stop penalising total objectors and ensure that the civilian
service is not longer than the shortest military service.
• tighten arms legislation and monitor compliance more
effectively than is currently the case. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Peace
Union of Finland, Women’s International League for Peace and
Freedom WILPF, Committee of 100 in Finland, Felm, The Union
of Conscientious Objectors AKL, Save the Children Finland, UN
Association of Finland, Finnish Development NGOs Fingo. 
//

FINLAND IS a proactive member of the global community and
defends the multilateral cooperation actively. The 2030 Agenda
and the Paris Agreement lay the foundation for Finland’s
international cooperation. 
//
Finland’s challenges: Finland’s development funding was
reduced significantly between 2016 and 2019. In 2018, Finland
used 833 MEUR (0.36% of its GNI, target: 0.7%) on development
cooperation. Aid to the least developed countries (LDCs) was
0.11% of the GNI (target: 0.15–0.2 %). The Government aims to
direct 0.7 % of GNI to development cooperation and 0.2 % of
GNI to the LDCs. A road map is to be drawn up for this purpose.
//
Finland has succeeded in: To enhance policy coherence,
Finland has a long tradition of inter-ministerial coordination
and engagement of civil society, the private sector, academia
and other stakeholders in sustainable development work. 
A multi-stakeholder National Commission for Sustainable
Development has operated since 1993 under the Prime
Minister’s leadership. Also, an Expert Panel of Professors and a
Youth Agenda 2030 Group have been established to challenge
and support the Commission. Finland also has a long-term
commitment to support multi-stakeholder partnerships in
science, technology and innovations for development. Finland
is currently spearheading innovation and digital development
particularly through the innovation activities of the UN. 
//
Our human rights-based development policy aims at
eliminating poverty, reducing inequalities and implementing
SDGs in LDCs. In order to leave no one behind, Finland has been
focusing its global implementation of the 2030 Agenda on four
priority areas: 1) Women and Girls, 2) Sustainable Economies
and Decent jobs, 3) Education and Democratic Societies, and
4) Climate Change and Natural Resources. Finland’s trade
policy is fully in line with the objectives to promote a universal,
rules-based, open, transparent, predictable, inclusive, nondiscriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system under
the WTO, as well as meaningful trade liberalisation. Finland
has also joined the Addis Tax Initiative in 2015 to strengthen
developing countries’ domestic resource mobilisation, and
will achieve the goal of doubling ODA to support domestic
resource mobilisation in low-income countries in 2021. 
In its development financing, Finland has devised several
instruments to target the financing gap in SDG investment
needs. 
//
Key national policy initiatives in 2015–2020
• Finland’s new Government programme (2019): the 2030
Agenda and the Paris Agreement provide the foundation for
international cooperation in the coming years. 
• An independent evaluation of Finland’s sustainable
development policy conducted in 2019, including
formulated concrete recommendations for the future. 
• Establishment of the Agenda 2030 Youth Group to engage
youth in sustainable development work and to challenge
and to support current policies and practices. 
• Strengthened support for UN agencies: The United Nations
Technology Innovation Lab (UNTIL) was established in
Finland in 2018 and the Global Innovation Program of
UNOPS in 2019. 
• A returnable capital investment programme to address the
SDG investment needs in developing countries. In 2016–
2019, EUR 530 million was channeled into loans and capital
investment. 
//
FINLAND’S CHALLENGE IS that we committed to channelling
0.7 per cent of GNI to development aid 50 years ago, but this
target has only been achieved once. In addition, those living
in the margins remain too excluded both in Finland and in
developing countries. Meaningful participation of people with
disabilities in the labour market and in societal decision-making
is still an exception. Sexual minorities and the unemployed
also have not been actively included to advance sustainable
development. 
//
Following the cuts in development financing, the number
of Finland’s global partnerships has decreased, civil society
partnerships have been lost and national volunteering in
particular has suffered. 
//
There has been a strong emphasis on private sector
cooperation. Private sector development actors, as any other
actor using public development funds, must provide adequate
qualitative and quantitative reporting and compliance with
common sustainable development principles. The growing
application of market terms in the promotion of sustainable
development risks leaving behind the most vulnerable. 
//
The input of the private sector is needed to achieve
sustainable development, but no individual party will be able
to achieve the targets on their own. More can be achieved with
less input by directing the sustainable development funding
more strategically and by utilising existing evaluation and
research data. 
//
Finland has succeeded in making a systematic long-term
commitment to its development partner countries. Finland has
also made a strong commitment to rules-based operations and
has invested internationally particularly in the development of
tax systems. 
//
In Finland, organisations are working in particular to raise
awareness of sustainable development and globally to increase
the administrative competence of partner organisations. 
Reinforcing the planning and reporting capacity of partners has
also increased the capabilities to recognise the linking of our
own work to the Sustainable Development Goals. 
//
Besides professional development organizations, CSOs
based on voluntarism have the opportunity to receive support
for development cooperation, but the number of organisations
to be supported has fallen drastically. 
//
The Finnish National Commission on Sustainable
Development promoted the implementation of the 2030
Agenda and the linking of it to the national sustainable
development work in the 2016–2019 programme period. The
Commission includes representatives from ministries, political
parties, trade and industries, municipalities and a broad
selection of representatives from civil society. There is also
a panel of scientific experts as well as youth delegates, who
challenged and assessed the work of the National Commission
on Sustainable Development and the progress of the Society’s
Commitment document. In future, the voice of young people
who are unemployed or have disabilities must be heard. 
//
 Finland must 
• keep its promise of increased funding for development
cooperation and sustainable development.
• ensure transparency and accountability in the
implementation, monitoring and reporting of value-based
partnership in private sector collaboration.
• demand for sustainable development value system and
human rights-based approach as prerequisites for all
projects and funding.
• further emphasize diversity and broad participation in the
implementation and monitoring the progress of Sustainable
Development Goals.
• in Government budget proposals, specify which documents
the allocation of appropriations are based on, and in the
spirit of transparency, make these documents public. 
//
Organisations participating in this assessment: Finnish
Development NGOs Fingo, the Finnish Central Organisation of
Trade Unions SAK, UN Association of Finland, Felm. 
//
Finland has been one of the top performers of sustainability according to the SDG Index
and Dashboard presented in the Sustainable Development Reports published by the
Sustainable Development Solutions Network32. Finland was placed fourth in the 2016
report and the country climbed to number three in 2017–2019 reports. 
//
Despite the good overall performance, the SDG Index and Dashboard suggest that further
action is needed related to several SDGs. According to the 2019 report, SDG2, SDG12,
SDG14 and SDG17 are the ones where greatest improvement is needed in Finland. On the
other hand, Finland is leading the implementation of SDG5 even though the goal is still
to be reached. Maintaining good performance and addressing vulnerable groups remain
permanent challenges also in cases where global goals are already reached. There appear
to be opportunities for Finland to learn from the experiences of several other countries, as
shown by the variety of countries leading the implementation of individual SDGs. 
//
Between 2016 and 2019 reporting, 50 indicators provide a solid basis for comparison
(Figure 11).34 Of these indicators 54% show an improving trend, 12% are on the target
without a noticeable change, while 34% show a decreasing trend. Overall, most of the
indicators show a good performance related to social and economic challenges while
greatest long-term challenges arise from high levels of consumption of materials and
energy. 
//
The most distinctive positive changes during the four years period include the following:
• Self-reported subjective well-being (SDG3) of Finns has remained at a very high level as
is shown also by the top position in the World Happiness Report. 
• Finns can enjoy excellent outdoor air quality as measured by particle concentration
(PM2,5). More widely, this indicates high standards of infrastructures (SDG9) and good
management and overall quality of urban environments (SDG11). 
//
The indicators with the most notable negative trend include:
• Obesity of adult population (SDG2) is a serious and increasing problem related both to
nutrition and insufficient physical activity.
• Ocean Health Index and fish caught by trawling indicate the multiple challenges facing
life below water (SDG14). 
• Low level of international concessional public finance, including official development
assistance, shows the difficulties to secure adequate long-term investments for effective
implementation of international partnerships (SDG17). 
//
The results highlight that changes in social, ecological and economic trends are
typically slow ones. Caution is needed when changes over time are looked through the
lenses of indicators since in many cases what seems as a radical or rapid change is caused
by alterations in indicator composition or data coverage rather than actual changes in the
country’s performance. 
//
International externalities or spillovers refer to costs (or benefits) that are generated by
one country’s actions to another country, and which are not reflected in market prices and
thus not internalised. In the context of SDGs, spillovers can generally be seen as positive
or negative effects of country’s actions to other countries’ ability to reach the SDGs.
According to SDSN’s report35 on international spillovers and the SDGs, negative effects
tend to flow from rich to poor countries, including through transnational companies
that control international supply chains. Therefore, as part of global efforts to achieve
the SDGs, rich countries bear a special responsibility to identify and tackle international
spillover effects. 
//
In case of Finland, comprehensive assessment of spillovers is not possible due to lack
of adequate data. In general, the assessment of spillovers is most advanced in the field
of international trade. The SDG Index Report 2019 has analysed spillovers caused by
international trade to environment, security, economy, finance and governance. In this
analysis, Finland scores 67,1, which is an average result for a high-income country. 
//
Finland’s national sustainability monitoring system include an indicator basket that
focuses on global responsibility and policy coherence. This basket includes indicators such as ODA, Finnish contribution in international crisis management, Finland’s performance
in Commitment to Development Index, and export and import of raw materials. Other
indicator baskets include additional indicators that relate to global responsibility, such
as carbon footprint of private consumption and number of quota refugees. A challenge
of most of these indicators is that there are no politically agreed target levels. More and
better indicators for annual monitoring of Finland’s spillovers would be needed. 
//
The European Union has a significant role as a producer of global positive and negative
spillovers. The EU could also be in frontline in developing indicators for monitoring
spillovers. During the Finnish EU Presidency in 2019, the EU Member States noted that
the EU information concerning the spillovers generated by the EU’s policies around the
world needs to be improved, and acknowledged the critical role the Eurostat could play in
developing ways to measure the global footprint (negative impact) and global handprint
(positive impact) of EU policies. 
//
The national state of sustainable development is followed up with 10 indicator baskets
and approximately 45 indicators. According to those, the state of Finland’s sustainable
development is as follows: 
//
The state of the environment has been improving as a result of successful efforts to cut
down emissions from major individual sources of pollution. Air quality in Finland is good
by international standards. However, the loss of biodiversity continues and in the latest
assessment of threatened species in Finland (2019) 11.9% of all species were classified as
threatened, compared to 10.5% in the previous assessment. While emissions into waters
have decreased, the Baltic Sea is still suffering from eutrophication. 
//
Finland is among the top countries in the European Union in the use of renewable energy.
Finland’s greenhouse gas emissions have taken a downward turn in the long term, but
in 2018 the total emissions rose 2 per cents. Most of Finland’s greenhouse gas emissions
originate from the energy sector and traffic. Forests form Finland’s most important carbon
sinks. 
//
An average Finn’s carbon footprint is about 10.3 tonnes per year. The carbon footprint of
housing and driving has decreased while the footprint of food products has remained
unchanged. Between EUR 30 and 35 billion is spent on public procurement every year, but
there is no quantitative follow-up data on the impacts of procurement. 
//
Housing and communities are changing as a result of the ageing population, urbanisation
and climate change. Most construction activities in Finland are focused on larger cities,
which means that their population density is increasing. This will further improve the
conditions for well-functioning public transport. Conversely, access to services is declining
in smaller urban centres and rural areas. An increasing proportion of elderly people live in
their own homes, over 90 per cents of people over 75 live at home. 
//
Finns’ perceived quality of life has improved. Perceived wellbeing is linked to socioeconomic status so that those who are better off also tend to enjoy a higher quality of
life. Finns living in the south and west are healthier than their peers in the east and north.
Intimate partner violence is a threat to women in particular. Finland is the second most
violent country for women within the European Union. 
//
The standard of living and quality of life have improved for a large proportion of Finns
over the last few decades. The growth in income disparities and low income rates seems to
have come to a halt, but the differences are still high. Nevertheless, income disparities in
Finland are among the lowest in the European Union with GINI index being 27.7 in 2017.
The number of recipients of basic social assistance has grown. 
//
The number of young people not in employment, education or training has decreased
slightly in Finland in recent years. Likewise, experience of loneliness among teenage boys
has declined, although boys experience more loneliness than girls. Finland is performing
well in rankings on corruption and press freedom. Voting activity increased by 2 per cent
in the 2019 parliamentary elections compared to elections in 2015. 
//
The working life is changing rapidly. The employment rate has improved and fewer and
fewer working people earn a low income. In 2019 the number of employed people rose
with over 17 000 persons and the employment rate rose to 72,6 per cent. Although by
international standards there is a sustainable basis to many aspects of the Finnish working
life, inequalities between women and men are large. The pay gap is not shrinking at the
desired rate and women have less autonomy at work than men. The pay gap between
women and men is above the EU average. 
//
Finland is known as a leading country in education and training. Its library utilization rate
is also at world-class level. Research and development expenditure has picked up after
a hiatus, while sustainable development is being taken more and more effectively into
account at schools and nursery schools. However, while reading literacy has traditionally
been strong among young Finns, it is now declining. Learning differences between girls
and boys are among the largest of all OECD countries. Men also acquire less education
than women. 
Finland’s level of commitment to improving lives in the poorest countries is good by
international standards. Relative to its population size, Finland plays an active role in
civilian crisis management operations. However, Finland falls short of the other Nordic
countries in terms of the level of development cooperation funding. The level of ODA
dropped in 2016 and has stayed significantly lower than the 0,7 per cent goal. In 2019 the
amount of ODA increased by EUR 90 milj. and it is now 0,41 per cent of Finland’s GDP. Very
little is known about the global impacts of Finnish consumption. 
//
A national citizen panel on sustainable development consists of around 500 Finns. It
assesses annually the current state and recent changes in sustainability issues in Finland,
based on national indicators. 
//
The panel functions in a following way: the task of panelists is to assess the current state
and recent development in Finland in the topics measured by national indicators, based
on data from national follow-up system. Each member of the panel study the indicators
and interpretative texts, and based on that information, position the topics measured by national indicators in a fourfold table. The panelists use an online assessment tool for
making the assessment. In the fourfold table, the lateral dimension indicates recent (5
years) development in a scale from bad to good, and vertical dimension indicates current
state in a scale from bad to good. 
//
The end result shows the location of all indicator-issues in a fourfold table. The location of
each indicator-issue in the fourfold table is the average of the assessments of all members
of the panel.
//
Each segment includes different advice to policy-making: Top Right: Secure – continue
existing policies that function well. Top left: Worry – check if existing policies are working.
Bottom right: Strengthen – existing policies seem to be working but may need to be
strengthened. Bottom left: Attack – existing policies seem not to be working, take new
measures. 
//
Worry: Literacy of young people continues to decline. Like last year, the issue the panel
was most concerned about was the future of young people. The panel members were
especially worried about the declining literacy among young people over the past few
years. According to the panel, young adults are still satisfied with their lives, but recent
developments give cause for concern about the future. In the other areas, the panel
members were particularly concerned about the availability and accessibility of grocery
shopping possibilities. 
//
Secure: We must hold on to the good quality of life. The panel stated that the current
state of many issues and the recent developments in Finland are good. The panel
members were particularly satisfied with the quality of life, the good level of education
and low morbidity in Finland. The panel considered young people’s trust in Finnish society
and their interest in societal matters to be at a good level. With regard to environmental
matters, good air quality and the increasing proportion of renewable energy in the final
use of energy must be ensured in the future. 
//
Strengthen: Promotion of low-emission mobility. The panel was concerned about
Finland’s greenhouse gas emissions. However, based on recent developments, they hoped
it will be possible to control them even better in the future. The panel members were of
the opinion that the CO2 emissions from cars registered for the first time were still too
high, but recent developments in this area also give cause for optimism. The panel also
believed that the efforts to reduce the number of young people not in employment or
education from last year have been successful and that this work must continue. 
//
Attack: Mitigation of biodiversity loss. The environmental issues most concerning the
panel members were the current state of biodiversity, the amount of environmentally
harmful subsidies, the carbon footprint of consumption in Finland and the nutrient load
from rivers to the Baltic Sea. Decision-makers should assess whether the current policy in
these issues is functioning sufficiently well. The panel members were of the opinion that
the number of people receiving basic social assistance or working part-time involuntarily
is still large and the current development does not look promising. The panel members
also found the gender pay gap considerable, and the situation does not seem to be
improving. 
//
Sustainable development has been taken into account in State budget by focusing on
appropriations promoting carbon neutrality. Generally, it is important that spending
is linked with national 2030 Agenda priorities. On revenue side, taxes can be used
effectively to promote sustainability, and subsidies need careful consideration. 
//
• Taxation is key for effective domestic resource mobilisation (DMR). Finland is supporting
taxation capacity building in Africa, corporate fiscal responsibility and voices of
developing countries in global tax policy. 
//
• Innovations and new technologies can make a great contribution to the 2030 Agenda.
The UN has become a key innovation partner for Finland. National innovation ecosystem
generates solutions for meeting the SDG’s, by the support of Business Finland and
Technical Research Agency VTT. Both organisations have included the 2030 Agenda in
their strategy. 
//
• Finland supports local innovation ecosystem development through multi-year bilateral
and regional programmes in developing countries. 
//
• Finland’s development aid fell significantly in 2016. Among the sectors that suffered
most from the cuts was environment and biodiversity. The current Government is
preparing a long-term National Road Map for increasing Finland’s ODA to 0,7% of GNI. 
//
National Strategic Research Council uses the 2030 Agenda as a guiding tool in the
preparation of annual thematic research proposal for the Government. 
//
Successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda requires strong political will and
ambitious targets and plans. However, the targets and plans cannot be operationalized
without appropriate tools and measures and sufficient resources. The measures, tools and
resources should enable accelerated action and transformative pathways to Governments
and all actors to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. 
//
Domestic resources and financing in the form of state and municipal budgets and other
economic instruments enable the public finances to focus on the key national challenges.
International development assistance remains one of the key catalytic sources of
financing for those developing countries most in need. Other sources and mechanisms of
international financing, trade and partnerships can be effective means of implementation
for developing and developed countries alike. 
//
Furthermore, better access to and use of sustainable development technologies and
innovations and sharing best practices works for the benefit of all nations. Finland is
committed to promoting innovations and partnerships to achieve the Sustainable
Development worldwide. Science is the cornerstone of the Finnish Government and
society to provide knowledge, solutions and innovations for sustainable development
home and abroad. 
//
The 2020 budget proposal promotes goals relating to carbon neutrality by a total of about
EUR 2.0 billion. This is approximately EUR 347 million more than the amount allocated to
equivalent measures in the 2019 Budget. The growth can be attributed to the increases in
appropriations agreed by the new Government as part of its Programme. The total 2020
Budget amounts to about EUR 57.7 billion. The breakdown in the table below is based on
the Government Programme. 
//
As a general rule, energy taxes, vehicle tax, car tax, waste tax and excise duty on certain
beverage containers, in particular, are in line with the Sustainable Development Goals,
although they may include both SDG-compliant and non-compliant individual tax
structures. 
//
Finland is currently preparing a tax reform for sustainable development with a view
to promoting the shift towards carbon neutrality. The tax reform for sustainable
development will consist of a reform of energy taxation, a reform of transport taxation,
promotion of the circular economy, and a study of emissions-based consumption taxation. 
//
The Government of Finland has decided that a sustainable taxation roadmap will be
drawn up to serve the Government’s climate goal. The first stage of this roadmap will be
completed in the spring of 2020. The preparations will seek solutions that promote the
Government’s climate objectives in the most economically effective way, accelerating the
shift away from fossil fuels while meeting the requirements of social justice. The package
will include a reform of energy taxation, a reform of transport taxation, promotion of the
circular economy, and a study of emissions-based consumption taxation. 
//
Environmentally harmful subsidies refer to subsidies that result in an increase in the
utilisation of natural resources and the environmental burden in the subsidised enterprise
or the subsidised sector. According to the OECD definition, a subsidy is classified as
harmful to the environment if it causes more environmental harm than would be the case
without it. Environmentally harmful subsidies and their implementation is justified for
reasons other than environmental ones. Environmentally harmful subsidies can have a
positive impact on other policy objectives for example food security. 
//
Environmentally harmful subsidies are especially included in the tax system, but they
can also be found among budget appropriations. Based on previous studies, the current
estimate of environmentally harmful subsidies stands at about EUR 3.6 billion, including
both appropriations and, in particular, tax subsidies. Environmentally harmful subsidies
are mainly directed at three sectors: energy, transport and agriculture. No particular
progress has been achieved in this area. 
//
The Government aims to direct 0.7 % of GNI to development cooperation over the long
term. Achieving the Government’s ODA targets –0,7 % to development cooperation and
0.2 % to LDCs – will require commitments that exceed parliamentary terms. 
//
The target was close in 2014, when the figure was 0.59 %. Cuts in 2016 as part of the
balancing of government finances changed the situation significantly. In 2018, Finland
used EUR 833 million (0.36% of its GNI) on development cooperation and was the ninth
largest development funder of the EU Member States. Finland’s development cooperation
expenditure fell in real terms by 14.6 % in 2018 from the previous year. 
Finland continued to support UN Women, UNFPA, UNDP, Unicef and UNEP with core
funding in 2016–2020. Cuts in 2016 decreased the core funding significantly in these
UN organisations. Finland had to also prioritise organisations heavily and in some UN
organisations, e.g. UNAIDS, core funding was cut completely. UN Women and UNFPA were
chosen as priority organizations as their work is fully aligned with one of the priority areas
of Finland’s development policy, namely the rights of women and girls, which is also the
priority of Finland’s foreign policy as a whole. 
//
The core contribution to UN Women was EUR 10 million annually in 2016–2019 and
EUR 19 million in 2020 compared to EUR 20 million in 2014. The core contribution to
UNFPA was USD 20 million annually in 2016–2018, EUR 20 million in 2019 and EUR 33
million in 2020 compared to EUR 45 million in 2014. UNDP’s core contribution was cut
significantly and it was EUR one million annually in 2016–2019 and EUR 2 million in 2020
compared to EUR 22 million in 2014. As regards to Unicef, core contribution was EUR 5,5
million annually in 2016–2020 compared to EUR 19,2 million in 2014. In addition, Finland
supported Unicef’s innovation work with EUR 1,5 million per year in 2016–2019. 
//
Finland has integrated the goals and objectives of the Climate Convention into its
development policy and is committed to support developing countries, especially LDCs
and SIDS, in their efforts related to climate change. Over the 21st century the Finnish
climate support has generally had an upward trend. However, as part of the general
Government adjustment measures the Government decided in 2015 on substantial
cuts on the appropriations for development cooperation starting from 2016. This has
also had some implications to the climate related support provided to developing
countries. At the same time, the Government also decided to allocate resources through
investment funding of which substantial part has and will be allocated to climate action.
Therefore, the total annual amount of climate funding has varied substantially ranging
from 43 million euros in 2016 to 119 million euros in 2017. According to the Government
Programme (2019) Finland will scale up climate finance as a part of its development
finance, taking due account of its contribution based on the Paris Agreement. 
//
However, the OECD DAC evaluation on Finland’s development policy pointed already in
2017 out the low levels of ODA for environment when compared to other DAC countries
(17% in Finland compared to average 27% in other DAC countries). The evaluation was
based on 2015 ODA, which was even further reduced after significant budget cuts in 2016,
including to GEF and UNEP. While increases have been provided for climate, the funding
for environment and biodiversity has remained at much lower level since 2016. 
//
The significant cuts to humanitarian budget in 2014–2016 decreased Finland’s total
humanitarian funding to UN organizations from EUR 73,2 million in 2015 to EUR 53,7
million in 2019. Earmarked funding to FAO, WHO and UNICEF was cut out. However,
Finland was able to continue multiyear unearmarked core funding with only minor
changes. Finland continued to support OCHA, WFP, UNHCR, UNRWA and UNDRR (UNISDR)
with core and earmarked funding in 2016–2020, and started earmarked funding to UNFPA
in 2017. 
//
The core humanitarian budget contributions have been as follows: UNHCR EUR 7 million
annually in 2016–2020, UNDRR EUR 1 million annually in 2016–2020, OCHA EUR 3,5
million annually in 2016–2018 and EUR 2,5 million annually in 2019–2020, UNRWA EUR
4,5 million annually in 2016–2018 and EUR 5 million annually in 2019–2020, and WFP
EUR 8 million annually from 2018–2020. In addition, Finland allocated to UN Central
Emergency Response Fund CERF EUR 7 million euros annually in 2016–2018 and EUR
8 million annually in 2019–2020. The earmarked humanitarian funding to UNHCR was
EUR 17 million in 2016 and EUR 13 million annually in 2017–2019. Earmarked funding to
WFP decreased from EUR 20,5 million in 2016 to EUR 12,8 million in 2017. In addition to
the new core funding, earmarked funding to WFP was EUR 5 million in 2018 and EUR 5,7
million in 2019. Earmarked funding to UNFPA was EUR 2,5 million in 2017, EUR 2 million in 2018 and EUR 3,5 million in 2019. Earmarked funding to UNICEF was EUR 3,5 million in
2016 and EUR 178 000 in 2017. 
//
According to the OECD DAC definition for multilateral and bilateral aid, the share of
multilateral aid (core support to multilateral organisations) has taken up around 40–50
percent of Finland’s ODA disbursements in 2016–2019, dropping to 39 percent in 2016
(EUR 377 million) and peaking at 52 percent in 2018 (EUR 431 million). (Share of bilateral
aid accounts for the remaining 50–60 percent by definition.) If the earmarked funding to
multilateral organisations (multi-bi) is included, the share is somewhat higher, reaching 65
percent in 2018 (EUR 536 million). 
//
Finland joined the Addis Tax Initiative 2015 and committed to doubling ODA to support
domestic resource mobilisation in low-income countries by 2020. Finland is going to
achieve this goal, but only in 2022. Finland drafted and implemented a multi-pillar Action
Programme 2016–2019 on Tax for Development (T4D). For the years 2020–2023 a new
Action programme has been drafted, with three main pillars: 1) taxation capacity in
Africa, 2) corporate fiscal responsibility, and 3) voice of developing countries in global tax
policy making. Some of the key partners are the African Tax Administration Forum (ATAF),
Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA), Tax Inspectors Without Borders (TIWB/OECD-UNDP),
Tax Justice Network Africa (TJNA), UNU-WIDER research on Taxation and Social Protection,
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and Publish What You Pay (PWYP) work
in Tanzania, Uganda and Mozambique. 
//
Finland’s strong focus on Africa is going to be further strengthened in line with the overall
development policies of Finland and the EU. Finland is committed to ensuring that all
companies benefiting from Finnish ODA fulfil their fiscal responsibilities in full. 
//
Finland is committed to promoting innovations and partnerships to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals and is recognized as a global forerunner in this area.
Finland supports the innovation efforts of UN organizations and contributes to the UNICEF
and UNFPA Innovation Funds, which aim to develop innovations for realizing the rights of
children as well as girls and women. Finland’s annual support to the UNICEF Innovation Fund is 1,5 million euros over several years, contributions to UNFPA Innovation Fund being
2 million euros since 2017. 
//
Finland hosts important innovation operations of the UN. The UN Technology and
Innovation Lab (UNTIL) in Espoo has become a leading hub in testing and scaling digital
innovations for achieving the SDG’s. Finland funds UNTIL by 2,5 million euros per year
from 2018 to 2020 with a possibility to further continue financial support. The UN Office
for Project Services (UNOPS) has established a Social Impact Investing Initiative (S3I) office
in Helsinki, which will also accommodate the UNOPS Innovation Programme. Through the
S3I, the UNOPS channels private capital into significant infrastructure projects supporting
sustainable development in developing countries. Finland contributes a total of 20 million
euros to the UNOPS Helsinki Office in 2020–2023. The setting up of these operations are
positive signals of the growing attractiveness and potential of the Finnish innovation
ecosystem in generating solutions for meeting the SDG’s. 
//
Finland promotes cooperation and coherence between innovation and development
policies. The Business with Impact programme provides innovation funding for businesses
and other parties heading for developing markets and builds companies’ SDG competence
in cooperation with CSOs. Implemented by Business Finland, the programme’s budget was
57 million euros (50 % government funding and 50 % private funding) in 2015–2019 with
151 projects implemented. Funding will continue in 2020–2023 with 22 million euros. With
funds from the EU Commission, Finland has also launched a project to develop sustainable
financing ecosystems and SDG-related business. 
//
Furthermore, Finland supports innovation ecosystem development in developing
countries through multi-year bilateral and regional programmes, namely the Southern
Africa Innovation Support Programme SAIS 2 (2017–2021, 9 million euros) and Accelerated
Growth Zambia AGS (2020–2024, 8 million euros). These remain important interventions
for maintaining and developing Finland’s direct innovation support activity in developing
countries and also provide essential connections to the markets in which they operate. 
//
Finland is a leading subject-matter expert on artificial intelligence (AI) and digital public
goods in the follow-up process of the report of the UN Secretary General’s High-Level
Panel on Digital Cooperation; through this work, Finland supports international digital
cooperation by strengthening rules-based governance and sustainable development.
Finland contributes to the Unit established at the Executive Office of the SecretaryGeneral, with the task of coordinating the follow-up to the report of the High-level Panel
on Digital Cooperation, by 400 000 euros and one JPO. Furthermore, Finland supports
the UNICEF’s AI and Child Rights Policy Project, aiming to develop guidance sensitive to
children’s rights for companies and governments utilizing AI. The project is funded by
859 000 euros. 
//
By means of innovation programs, implemented by Business Finland and VTT, Finland
supports the invention of innovations concerning sustainable development, as well as
the scaling of innovations internationally. Via the aforementioned programs, sustainable
solutions are developed concerning e.g. clean energy (SDG7), circular economy (SDG8,
SDG12), smart industry (SDG9), health and well-being (SDG3), clean technologies and lowcarbon solutions (SDG13), urbanization (SDG11), and digital solutions. 
//
Finland also promotes the 2030 Agenda Goals as part of its national space strategy. VTT
Technical Research Centre of Finland develops space technologies and competence,
such as image analysis technologies based on artificial intelligence and other analysis
methodologies. These enable the use of satellite and drone images for purposes such as
performing forest inventories, analyzing plantations and monitoring the environmental
status of water bodies. 
//
Finland aims to promote AI competence widely to ensure that no-one is left behind in its
development. A good example is the web-based Elements of AI course open to everyone
free of charge. The course, developed as a joint project between the University of Helsinki
and technology company Reaktor, offers a low-threshold opportunity to acquire basic AI
skills. Over 270 000 students from more than 170 countries have signed up for the course. 
//
Finland seeks new, fast-acting measures and initiatives to combat climate change and
implement its ambitious national climate targets. A good example is cooperation between
the Government and industrial sectors to draw up roadmaps in identifying development
paths for different sectors and businesses to reduce their own climate emissions. In
addition to the major GHG-emitting industrial sectors (energy, forestry, technology, and
chemistry), the work is also being carried out in ten other sectors. 
//
Strategic research programs cover the 2030 Agenda aims well. None of the programs
target a specific SDG or its aims, but all of them work on multiple issues identified in the
2030 Agenda. 
//
The preparation for themes of strategic research programs are based on the law on
Academy of Finland, a transparent thematic preparation, an annual strategic research
thematic decision by the Government of Finland, Strategic Research Council’s (SRC)
decisions on program calls (based on the Government’s thematic decision) and SRC
funding decisions. 
///
The strategic research programs cover all SDGs (see the chart below, linking each SRC
program to the SDGs). Each program link multiple SDGs to each other. All programs tackle
the 2030 Agenda issues in a multidisciplinary way. 
//
Strategic research programs concentrate especially on the following SDGs:
• 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages. 
• 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and
foster innovation. 
• 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries. 
• 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels. 
//
SRC uses the 2030 Agenda extensively each year as the Council prepares an annual
thematic proposal for the Government. 
//
Government’s analysis, assessment and research activity (VN TEAS) is a crossgovernmental research funding instrument with a yearly budget of around EUR 10 million
through which the Finnish Government and ministries commission various types of
studies, analyses and assessments to support policy preparation and decision-making. 
The Government adopts annually a plan for analysis, assessment and research that steers
research activities towards specific priority areas selected by the Government. 
//
Within Government’s analysis, assessment and research activity, the Finnish Government
has taken into account the research needs that arise from the 2030 Agenda. Between
2017–2019, 187 research and analysis projects with a combined budget of EUR
28,4 million were carried out. Around half of these projects (92 projects with joint budget
of EUR 14,8 million) were closely linked to sustainable development goal and sub-goals of
the 2030 Agenda. Research and analysis projects were carried out related to each of the
17 2030 Agenda goals except for the goal 14 (Life below water) (Figure 17). Furthermore, it
is worth to note that the linkages between the projects and particular 2030 Agenda subgoals are in many cases relatively direct: 2/3 of the above mentioned projects link well or
very well to concrete sub-goals of the 2030 Agenda. 
//
Also the Government’s analysis, assessment and research plan for 2020 which was
adopted by the Government in December 2019 strongly embraces the perspective of
sustainable development. The plan supports the implementation of the Government
Programme of Prime Minister Marin, which is based on the objectives of social, economic
and ecological sustainability. For instance, research needs related to carbon neutrality and
securing biodiversity are strongly present in the plan: there are over 10 research needs
related to these topics the joint budget of which are over two million euros. 
//
This Voluntary National Review has described the work done and progress achieved in
Finland during the last four years in the implementation on the 2030 Agenda. Key changes
and lessons learned have been addressed in the beginning of each chapter, giving the
reader an overview of most significant issues. 
//
The preparation of this VNR is one milestone in the journey towards the year 2030 and the
fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda. Finland is committed to reaching the SDGs by 2030, and
continues towards that aim, with coherent and inclusive approach. 
//
Finland will report on national progress to the HLPF next time in 2025. Between 2020 and
2025, Finland will continue ambitious implementation of the 2030 Agenda, on the basis
of the Government programme and the second national implementation plan that will be
submitted to the Parliament later in 2020. 
//
The Finnish Government will work on all SDG’s, giving special attention to SDG’s with
specific national challenges. Finland will strive for carbon neutrality by 2035. This is an
ambitious goal and requires significant transitions in the society that need to be achieved
in a socially just manner. 
//
The Government is planning to prepare a national roadmap of the 2030 Agenda that
would extend over electoral periods up until 2030. This roadmap will support long-term
planning and coherent policy making. At the moment, different ways of producing the
roadmap are under consideration. 
//
The Government continues focusing on achieving sustainable results in all its
development policy priorities, and through all development cooperation modalities in
2020 and beyond. This includes continued support to the reform of the UN system for
effective delivery of the 2030 Agenda. The Government is preparing a long-term national
roadmap for increasing Finland’s Official Development Aid to 0,7% of GNI. 
In its efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda and reach all SDGs, Finland will consider the
levers and entry points of the Global Sustainable Development Report, as well as calls to
action presented in the GSDR. The Finnish Expert Panel for Sustainable Development has
prepared a national toolkit to promote a systemic transformation towards sustainable
development in Finland. The Government will take advantage of the analysis of the Expert
Panel in the future development of national sustainability policies. 
//
This report was finalized under exceptional circumstances. Corona pandemic has caused
upheavals around the world. Finland, among others, has faced enormous challenges
and the need for change of practices in the society. The corona pandemic has required
changes to the short-term economic policy agenda of the Government, but the longterm challenges of the economy have not significantly changed. In this current situation,
it is even more important to invest in employment actions, to promote the circular
economy, to perform social- and healthcare reformation, to increase productivity and
to limit expenditure growth. This should all happen as soon as possible after the acute
crisis has subsided. Climate change continues, regardless of the current circumstances,
and requires even more vigorous actions. At the same time, it is important to safeguard
democracy, functioning of the rule of law and realization of human rights. The objectives
of sustainable development, as well as long-term intergenerational thinking over
parliamentary terms, will remain as the basis of Finnish sustainable well-being and at the
heart of Finnish governmental work. Finland will keep carrying its global responsibility
also during the times of crisis and supports long-term multilateral cooperation, fragile
countries and vulnerable groups of people. 

