The human well-being and capabilities; socialjustice transition area links SDGs 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9 and10. The present and future well-being of all peopleis at the heart of sustainable development. Morethan any that have gone before, the currentgeneration has the knowledge and the means toshape the future in a sustainable manner. The taskis to secure each person’s fundamental rights andbasic needs, protect them from existential threats,foster their prosperity and enable them to livesustainably. It is a task to be tackled across a largenumber of policy areas.//To facilitate human well-being around the world,human rights must be upheld, work paid appropriately, social security generated, gender-specificinequalities tackled and social structures changedthat prevent marginalised sections of society andminorities living a self-determined life. Theobjective is to ensure that global value chainsrespect these aspects from start to finish, a task forwhich states and businesses are equally responsible. Another key challenge is to reduce inequalitiesin order to open up prospects of economic andsocial development to all and to stabilise theeffectiveness of democracies around the world.//The German Government is pursuing 25 nationaland international human rights priorities usingthe framework of its 2021-2022 Action Plan forHuman Rights. These correlate in large part withthe 17 SGDs, which are covered in this report.//Not just the COVID 19 pandemic demonstrateshow crucial good health and well-being are tosurvival. Germany is actively committed toensuring that the lessons of COVID 19 are takeninto account in future efforts to reshape the globalhealth architecture. Interdisciplinary perspectivesthat place human health in the broader context ofanimal and environmental health are becomingincreasingly important. That is why the GermanGovernment promotes the One Health approachat the national, regional and international levelsand champions protecting the health of farm andwild animals as well as biodiversity and naturalhabitats. An important element of healthcare isupholding and ensuring access to sexual andreproductive healthcare and rights, which theGerman Government campaigns for across theglobe. In this context, education, science andresearch form the basis of a self-determined,responsible life while paving the way for theachievement of all sustainability targets.//The transition area focused on climate action andenergy transition (SDGs 13 and 7) demands anintegrated approach based on climate protectionthat transcends the boundaries of different policyareas and SDGs. On the basis of decisions from theEU and in consideration of the latest order issuedby the Federal Constitutional Court, the GermanGovernment submitted the bill for a revisedFederal Climate Change Act on 12 May 2021. The new version setsa stricter target for greenhouse gas emissions: areduction of at least 65% by 2030 compared with1990 levels, instead of the previous 55%. Emissionsfrom different parts of the economy are to be keptbelow sector-specific thresholds that will belowered year on year. Greenhouse gas emissionsare to be cut by at least 88% by 2040, and greenhouse gas neutrality is to be achieved by 2045. Inaccordance with this trajectory, electricity supplywill be overwhelmingly decarbonised in the 2030s.Furthermore, a crucial precondition of achievingthe climate goals is to save energy and use it moreefficiently. Research and innovation will play animportant role in driving progress towards thatobjective. This may also open up new value-creation potential for Germany as a venue forbusiness and industry. The Federal ConstitutionalCourt moreover emphasised the internationaldimension of the constitutional imperative toprotect the climate. The German Government willcontinue to push consistently for significantprogress on climate action and sustainability onthe world stage. It will increase its efforts in thefield of international climate and sustainabledevelopment policy. //Construction and buildings, as well as the transport sector, are addressed as part of the transitionarea on sustainable building and the transformation of transport. It is linked to SDGs 7, 8, 9, 11, 12and 13. Just like the other transition areas, thereare synergies with other topics relating to sustainability. Given its upstream and downstreamprocesses, the construction and buildings sector isclosely interwoven with other areas of transition.Sustainable construction requirements coverenergy efficiency and climate neutrality, biodiversity safeguards, resource conservation and the useof renewable raw materials, a reduction in landuse, the sustainable procurement of products andservices, including respect for human rights insupply chains, and measures to ensure the healthand comfort of users.//All of these requirements demand an approachinvolving different ministries and sectors. Takingall aspects into account, buildings are responsiblefor around 40% of greenhouse gas emissions. TheGerman Government will therefore put evenmore effort into promoting sustainable, climate-neutral construction and will draw up aninterdepartmental action plan in the course of2021. The action plan will focus, for example, onexpanding the promotion of accredited certification for sustainable building and developing asimplified procedure for auditing a building’senvironmental credentials that can be used by thegeneral public. Mobility is an essential element oflife in society that must remain accessible andaffordable to all people. At the same time, mobilitymust be more responsive to environmental andclimate-related concerns to make the transporttransition a success. To guide this process towardssustainability, in September 2018 the GermanGovernment launched the National Future ofMobility platform. Since the beginning of 2021,further powerful leverage has come from theintroduction of carbon pricing in the transportsector (alongside the heating sector). There mustbe a particular effort to bring technologicalinnovations and developments in alternative drivetechnologies and fuels etc. to market quickly, to dofull justice to our evolving mobility needs and therole of the transport sector in climate action. //A holistic perspective is required to achieveprogress in the sustainable agricultural and foodsystems transition area, which ties in with SDGs 2and 3 with further links to SDGs 12 and 15. Theterm “food systems” describes the complexinterrelationships and interdependencies betweenthe ways in which agricultural commodities areproduced, processed and transported and howfoodstuffs are consumed and handled.//The German Government supports the integratedapproach also followed by the UN Food andAgriculture Organization (FAO) and is working toenhance food systems in Germany and the EU toreflect the SDGs more closely. Organic farmingwill play an important role in this not only inGermany and Europe, where it is to make up 20%and 25% of the sector respectively by 2030, butaround the world. Further measures includeenhancing sustainability in mass catering andreducing food waste. In practice, this meansjointly formulating national, European andinternational food, agricultural, forestry, fisheries,climate, environment and health policy, anddesigning strategies and measures in the sameway. The aim here is to ensure a sufficient supplyof a variety of safe, affordable foodstuffs, as well asa healthy diet for everyone around the world. Atthe same time, environmental and climateprotections must be guaranteed, conditions andhealthcare for farm animals improved, producers’rights respected and their working and livingconditions upgraded, and rural areas made moreattractive as places to live and work. //A pollutant-free environment provides the basisfor health and well-being, including both physicaland mental health. In addition to all of theenvironment-related SDGs (6, 13, 14, and 15), thisarea of transition also affects some of the socialgoals (SDGs 3 and 11), and impacts indirectly onthe economic ones, especially SDG 8.The German Government regards the AssessmentSystem for Sustainable Building as well as environmental law, with its interplay of requirementsunder chemicals law, water and emissions safeguards and legislation on waste, as the mainjumping-off points from which to achieve apollutant-free environment. Consumer awarenessabout the implications of purchasing decisionsshould also be raised by a targeted informationcampaign. //The German Government has identified theprimary transformative measures for these sixareas that will be used to achieve measurableprogress in each case. They are set out in Chapter 4below. The policies and measures are implemented at three levels: focusing on implementationand effect in Germany, focusing on internationalimpact and focusing on supporting partnercountries. The figure below shows how the areasof transition relate to the off-track indicators, i.e.those targets and measures within the GermanSustainable Development Strategy where action isparticularly required, as well as the key measuresthe German Government is undertaking in thoseareas.//The assumption of global responsibility is one ofthe principles of the German Sustainable Development Strategy and part of a comprehensive visionfor a sustainable future in Germany.//The German Government aligns its internationalactivities with the principle of sustainability. European cooperation is indispensable for Germany.By consistently implementing the 2030 Agenda,Germany can make an important contributionwithin and through the EU to the successfullong-term management of global challenges.//The guiding principle of Germany’s foreign anddevelopment policy is an awareness that peaceand security, human rights, and sustainabledevelopment are interdependent. Over the lastseven decades, Germany has benefited from arelatively stable, rules-based international order.One of the most important tasks of German policyis to help maintain that order, develop it further incollaboration with like-minded partners andpromote multilateral cooperation through, forexample, the Alliance for Multilateralism whichthe German Government has launched togetherwith France and other partners. At the heart ofthese endeavours is the need to strengthen theUnited Nations and the institutions of the rulesbased international order. International organisations and multilateralism as an overall approach,as well as close exchange with partners in acommunity of shared values and interests, play animportant part in global progress towards sustainability. Germany is therefore committed tomultilateral action and to multilateral approachesto implement the 2030 Agenda in its entiretyalongside international partners. This covers thedifferent areas of the 2030 Agenda, bindingagreements under international law, and otherforms of international cooperation, in addition toefforts to strengthen international organisations,strategic alliances, and topic-based partnerships.Implementing the UN Security Council’s Women,Peace and Security (WPS) Agenda, for example, is apolitical priority for the German Government anda core element of SDG 16. In its third nationalWPS Action Plan, adopted in February 2021, theGerman Government has put forward an ambitious strategy for the coming four years to consolidate the full inclusion of women in crisis prevention, peace processes and post-conflictpeacebuilding and enhance protection againstsexual violence.//The 2030 Agenda with its SDGs and the ParisClimate Agreement are central points of referencefor the German Government’s internationalactivities and development cooperation. As theworld’s second-largest provider of official development assistance (ODA), Germany plays a pivotalrole in their implementation and the pursuit oftheir goals in partner countries.//Successful implementation of the 2030 Agendaand the German Sustainable DevelopmentStrategy is feasible only if it is broadly supportedand actively furthered by society as a whole.//The principle of leaving no one behind, which isenshrined in the 2030 Agenda, is central here. Itdescribes the obligation that we have as a societyto bring all people along on the path towardssustainable development. Putting this principleinto practice and reaching the poorest and mostdisadvantaged first is one of the primary tasks thatgovernments and international cooperation mustfulfil. In July 2019, in response to the findings ofthe Commission on Equivalent Living Conditions,the German Government adopted the goal ofreducing existing disparities and preventing themfrom becoming entrenched.//The German Government has included civilsociety, business and the academic community inthe procedure of updating the German Sustainable Development Strategy as well as in thedialogue process involved in producing thepresent report. The transition to a sustainableGermany can only succeed if understood as a jointendeavour – that is, as a road which the federal,Land and local authorities and the various groupswithin society will travel together. The Community Sustainability Project (GemeinschaftswerkNachhaltigkeit), starting in spring 2022, is intendedto raise the visibility of existing efforts for sustainable development, promote more such endeavours, get new stakeholders involved and motivatevarious players to engage in new collaborations.The project can thus be expected to generate freshmomentum within society for the pursuit ofsustainable development.//The present VNR outlines major elements of theupdated German Sustainable DevelopmentStrategy adopted in March 2021. With this review,Germany is living up to its voluntary commitmentto regular international reporting for the secondtime.//The German Sustainable Development Strategy isthe key instrument for strategically guiding andimplementing sustainability in Germany. It isaligned with the 2030 Agenda and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).//The various institutions and bodies that shape andadvance sustainable development on the basis ofthe Sustainable Development Strategy in Germanywere described in detail in Germany’s previousVNR in 2016. Since then, Germany’s sustainabledevelopment architecture has been continuouslyrefined and supplemented by new mechanisms.The following overview shows how it all works:.//• In order to ensure coordinated and joint actionby the various government departments whenit comes to implementing the 2030 Agenda,additional high-level interministerial liaisonofficers for sustainable development wereappointed in each federal ministry in 2017.They serve as key points of contact for mattersof sustainable development and are involvedacross the various divisions of their ministriesin the incorporation of the German SustainableDevelopment Strategy and the 2030 Agendainto departmental policy, such as factoringaspects of sustainability into legislative andregulatory procedures.//• All federal ministries now publish ministerialreports once every legislative term in whichthey explain how their policy is helping toimplement the 2030 Agenda.//• Headed by the Federal Chancellery and comprising all the federal ministries, the StateSecretaries’ Committee on Sustainable Development is the German Government’s keysteering committee regarding the GermanSustainable Development Strategy. Since 2018,it has been advised by a dialogue group madeup of various societal stakeholders. The StateSecretaries’ Committee is of primary importance when it comes to enhancing the consistency of policy measures. The decisions made atits meetings provide a yardstick and touchstonefor those shaping policy at the ministerial level.//Every bill or draft ordinance requires theministries to conduct an ex ante sustainabilityimpact assessment, i.e. one carried out before itis put to the vote. The targets and indicators ofthe German Sustainable Development Strategy,the Principles for Sustainable Development,and other references to the individual SDGsprovide the frame of reference for this assessment. A computer-assisted tool called eNAPwas developed to improve the quality ofregulatory impact assessments while alsomaking them easier to perform. Overseeing theconduct of sustainability impact assessmentsfalls within the remit of the ParliamentaryAdvisory Council on Sustainable Development.//In 2018, at the behest of the German Government, the Council for Sustainable Developmentorganised a peer review of Germany’s strategyand policy for sustainable development. TheGerman Government’s objective is to use thepeer review, which is already on its thirditeration, to gain a neutral view of the strengthsand weaknesses of its own activities. The reportcontaining the international experts’ findingsprovided important impulses for furtherdeveloping the German Sustainable Development Strategy. //In Germany’s federal structure, powers to enactand enforce legislation on important areas ofsustainable development lie with the Länder orlocal authorities. In 2019, as part of officialfederal-Länder cooperation, the Federal Chancellor and the heads of government of the 16 Länderadopted the resolution Working Together toPromote Sustainable Development while Assuming Responsibility for a Bright Future in Germany,Europe and around the World, which describessustainable development as a task that the FederalGovernment and Länder share. Eleven Länderhave adopted or are working on sustainabledevelopment strategies of their own. The Federal-Länder Exchange on Sustainable Developmentprovides a forum for the federal and Land levels todiscuss their activities in this field on a regularbasis//Other key players in the implementation of the2030 Agenda – according to the principle ofthinking globally and acting locally – are cities andlocal communities. The Association of GermanCities, the German Association of Towns andMunicipalities and the Association of GermanCounties have all declared their commitment toboth the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement onclimate change. The systematic localisation of theSDGs is driven forward in many different ways bylocal authorities’ integrated sustainable development strategies. In addition, an increasing numberof cities have been producing their own voluntarylocal reviews (VLRs) on their efforts to implementthe 2030 Agenda. The German Governmentsupports these activities via the Service AgencyCommunities in One World run by EngagementGlobal. To enhance practical experience-sharing, anew format for dialogue on sustainable cities hasbeen set up for city mayors – the OB Dialoginitiated by the German Council for SustainableDevelopment. The format has served to draw up aset of strategic cornerstones for sustainabledevelopment in municipalities. More than 30cities and local authorities are currently takingpart in the mayors’ dialogue. German cities’ andcommunities’ commitment to sustainable development also comes to the fore in Germany’s firstprogress report on implementation of the NewUrban Agenda (May 2021), which looks at theurban dimension of work towards the SDGs.//The brief report by the Association of GermanCities (see Annex) demonstrates the specialdedication and the important role of the locallevel in implementing the 2030 Agenda in Germany as well as in our international activities. Theoverview of the approach and creation of voluntary local reviews (VLRs) of implementation of the2030 Agenda at the municipal level gives examplesof the key challenges and implementation ideasbeing tackled by cities and communities inGermany. Most particularly, cities like Bonn,Mannheim and Stuttgart have led the way interms of drawing up VLRs.// When implementing or intending to plan measures, particularly legislative changes, the GermanGovernment seeks dialogue with those involvedor affected. This provides an opportunity toexplain the measures that are in the pipeline andallows stakeholders to articulate their ideas,criticisms and suggestions for improvement. Theprocess often results in a higher quality of government action and increased levels of public approval of the decisions taken.//When it comes to updating the German Sustainable Development Strategy, the public have beenand continue to be included via the internet andconsultations with the various interest groups.//Between 2019 and 2021, the German SustainableDevelopment Strategy was revised by means of aparticipatory process and ultimately adopted bythe Federal Cabinet on 10 March 2021. The graphicbelow outlines the schedule.//Gratifyingly, that process saw around 360 writtenstatements submitted by key community stakeholders, ranging from umbrella organisations andindividual associations representing civil society,business and trade unions, to members of theacademic community as well as interestedindividuals. Four regional conferences were alsoheld, bringing together 1,400 representativeparticipants.//For many years, moreover, the German Government has used a regular 2030 Agenda dialogueforum involving NGOs, business associations,trade unions, Länder, local authorities and theacademic community to discuss the internationalsustainability agenda. What is more, YouthDelegates for sustainable development enrich thenational discourse with the perspective of futuregenerations. They are part of the German delegation to the United Nations High-level PoliticalForum on Sustainable Development (HLPF),where business, trade unions, and environmentaland development associations are also regularlyrepresented.//Parallel to the final drafting process for theGerman Sustainable Development Strategy, theGerman Government began in autumn 2020 toengage in dialogue with civil society, business,trade unions and the research community, as wellas the Länder and local authorities, on the draftingand presentation of this VNR and requested inputto it.//Particularly useful in this regard were the established formats of Germany’s high-level preparatory conferences to the HLPF and the 2030 Agendadialogue forums, which, in light of the pandemic,have been held in virtual formats since spring2020. Inspired by recommendations from theGerman Council for Sustainable Development,national HLPF conferences have been held inGermany since 2019. The second and third suchconferences, held in December 2020 and April2021, focused on the 2020-2030 Decade of Actionfor implementation of the 2030 Agenda and onsustainability in the post-pandemic recovery.//The above-mentioned stakeholders from acrosssociety had the chance to comment on theinterministerial draft of the VNR and to putforward and discuss their positions and proposalsin a meeting of the dialogue forum. Additionally,the German associations continuously involved inthe HLPF drew up their own assessments of theimplementation of the 2030 Agenda in and byGermany, which are provided alongside thisreview (see Annex). //During the period covered by this review, theGerman Government launched a series of important measures intended to help achieve the SDGsin Germany, at the global level and in concert withinternational partners. They are described inChapter 4 below.//A major element in the process of reworking theGerman Sustainable Development Strategy for2021 was updating the indicators (see the individual sections on each SDG below). The Strategynow contains 75 indicators which are publishedby Germany’s Federal Statistical Office and formthe backbone of this VNR. The German Government is particularly focused on those indicatorswhere attainment of the targets is not yet assured.//A monitoring system has been set up for theoff-track indicators. Following publication of theIndicator Report by Germany’s Federal StatisticalOffice, the federal ministries will in future compilea joint report about the status of target achievement and planned measures for the benefit ofoff-track indicators. Once the State Secretaries’Committee on Sustainable Development hasgiven its input, that report will be published.//By strengthening the global dimension of theindicators, the German Government has responded to input received during the dialogue processon updating the German Sustainable Development Strategy for 2021. Fourteen of the 75 indicators now have a global connection. Moreover, theFederal Statistical Office actively involves itself inthe work of the UN’s Inter-Agency and ExpertGroup on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators (IAEG). Additional IAEG indicators withrelevance to Germany can be found on thesustainable development indicators page of theFederal Statistical Office website.//It remains a challenge to comprehensively depictthe adverse spill-over effects – economic, social,environmental and security-related – that industrialised countries like Germany cause for othercountries, especially those in the Global South.Taking account of such effects and their development over time is important and constitutes partof the work of implementing the 2030 Agenda andits SDGs in the coming years. That is why theOrganisation for Economic Co-operation andDevelopment (OECD) and the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC) recently presented a joint report on the cross-border effectsconnected to the implementation of the 2030Agenda. Given the increasing relevance of thistopic not only for civil society and business inGermany but also for the Global South, theGerman Government is already working todevelop ways of measuring effects of this kind. Forexample, the indicator for global environmentaldamage caused by private household consumption, duly expanded, was included in the updatedGerman Sustainable Development Strategy(indicator 12.1.b). Germany furthermore supportsthe United Nations Sustainable DevelopmentSolutions Network (SDSN) in efforts to close datagaps in respect of spill-over effects at the international level.//ABC1 //By adopting the 2030 Agenda, the international community of states has set itself theambitious aim of ending extreme poverty by 2030. The eradication of poverty in all itsforms and dimensions is one of the greatest global challenges of the present time and anindispensable condition for sustainable development. Progress on reducing poverty offersthe opportunity for sea changes in other areas too. If SDG 1 is to be achieved, however,successes in all of the other goals will be crucial. Achievement of SDG 1 depends onleaving no one behind. In other words, even greater efforts will be required to enddiscrimination and exclusion and to reduce inequality between people.//
In the German Sustainable Development Strategy, SDG 1 is covered by two indicators: material deprivation, which measures perceived material hardship, and severe material deprivation, which describes the lack of specific consumer goods and the involuntary foregoing of discretionary consumption for financial reasons . 
//The target of the German Government is to ensurethat the proportion of people affected by poverty isbeing kept significantly below the EU-27 level by2030. On the basis of the latest available time1 This indicator is intended to illustrate personal circumstances in which a risk of poverty exists. It is part of a set of indicators used by the GermanGovernment for comprehensive reporting on poverty and wealth. The set comprises 11 indicators from various areas, such as unemployment,in-work poverty or poverty risk, income distribution, health, receipt of income support benefits, social participation, overindebtedness andhousing (see also the report on poverty and wealth (in German) at www.armuts-und-reichtumsbericht.de).series, both elements of the target are alreadybeing met. Whereas only 6.8% of people inGermany are materially deprived, the EU levelstands at 13.1%. Similarly, in terms of severematerial deprivation, the rate of 2.6% in Germanyis a good bit below the EU average of 5.5%. In thecourse of time, moreover, a gradual decline in theproportion of people affected by poverty has beenobservable both in Germany and in the EU as awhole. In the effort to end material and severematerial deprivation, the trend is thereforemoving in the right direction.//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 1 is covered by two indicators: materialdeprivation, which measures perceived materialhardship, and severe material deprivation, whichdescribes the lack of specific consumer goods andthe involuntary foregoing of discretionaryconsumption for financial reasons.//The target of the German Government is to ensurethat the proportion of people affected by poverty isbeing kept significantly below the EU-27 level by2030. On the basis of the latest available time1 This indicator is intended to illustrate personal circumstances in which a risk of poverty exists. It is part of a set of indicators used by the GermanGovernment for comprehensive reporting on poverty and wealth. The set comprises 11 indicators from various areas, such as unemployment,in-work poverty or poverty risk, income distribution, health, receipt of income support benefits, social participation, overindebtedness andhousing (see also the report on poverty and wealth (in German) at www.armuts-und-reichtumsbericht.de).series, both elements of the target are alreadybeing met. Whereas only 6.8% of people inGermany are materially deprived, the EU levelstands at 13.1%. Similarly, in terms of severematerial deprivation, the rate of 2.6% in Germanyis a good bit below the EU average of 5.5%. In thecourse of time, moreover, a gradual decline in theproportion of people affected by poverty has beenobservable both in Germany and in the EU as awhole. In the effort to end material and severematerial deprivation, the trend is thereforemoving in the right direction.//Germany regards effective efforts to combatpoverty as one of the keys to global sustainabledevelopment. In 2017, according to World Bankestimates, 689 million people in the world wereliving in extreme poverty, that is to say on lessthan USD 1.90 a day. As a consequence of theCOVID-19 pandemic, up to 124 million morepeople fell into extreme poverty in 2020 alone. TheWorld Bank estimates that this figure mightincrease to as many as 163 million in 2021.//In Germany, the principle of the welfare state isenshrined in the constitution. Besides the constitutionally guaranteed provision for necessary livingexpenses plus a reasonable minimum level ofexpenditure on participation in social and culturallife to ensure decent living conditions for everyone, the main focus of German Governmentpolicy is on bolstering the financial situation ofindividuals and households on relatively lowincomes. Next to transfer payments, this requiresefforts in other areas such as economic, education,employment, environment, equal opportunities,family, fiscal, health, housing and infrastructurepolicy. In Germany, people with lower incomes onaverage are primarily lone parents, families withthree or more children, the unemployed, parttime workers with relatively few working hoursand/or in low pay groups, people with littleeducation and those from migrant backgrounds//In the context of Germany’s international development cooperation, the establishment anddevelopment of social security systems in partnercountries of the Global South is regarded as a keycontribution to the worldwide struggle againstpoverty. Such support is primarily intended toenable people – particularly the poor and disadvantaged – to meet their basic needs and protectthemselves against risks. At the same time, itcreates the conditions for enhanced economic andsocial inclusion of these people.//The German Government pursues a preventiveapproach to combating poverty. Its aim is toachieve a high employment rate with adequatepay levels. For example, by means of the SkillsDevelopment Opportunities Act (Qualifizierungschancengesetz), the German Government has improved the reskilling of employedpersons affected by the general process ofstructural change. In this way employees’ skillscan be developed to match the needs ofcompanies before any redundancies occur//Poverty avoidance through adequate wages:Following the introduction of a nationwideminimum wage in 2015 and its continuousadjustment, the income situation of low-paidworkers not self-employed has been distinctlyimproved. The introduction of the minimumwage has benefited about four million people,including disproportionately large numbers offemale employees.//Relief for low-income families: The supplementary child allowance scheme was recast in 2019and 2020 by the Strong Families Act(Starke-Familien-Gesetz).//Action to support and establish social securitysystems in partner countries: In the context ofbilateral development cooperation, this actioncovers both more comprehensive protectionschemes, such as income support, healthinsurance, occupational accident insurance andpensions insurance, and specific measures forpoor sections of the population, such as cashtransfers, public employment measures andvouchers for healthcare services for infants andtoddlers. India as a case study: Germany providedIndia with advice on the introduction of astate-funded scheme of free health insurance. Since 2018, some 500 million peoplehave received coverage through the scheme. Malawi as a case study: Germany assistedMalawi in introducing directly receivabletransfer benefits. Since the introduction ofthese benefits, known as Social Cash Transfers, about 600,000 people have benefitedfrom them.//Promotion of fair working conditions and livingwages: Firstly, this is done as part of Germany’sbilateral development cooperation, for examplethough the Special Initiative on Training andJob Creation and the Employment and Skills forDevelopment in Africa (E4D) project. Secondly,it is achieved through the initiation and promotion of multi-stakeholder partnerships like thePartnership for Sustainable Textiles and theGerman Initiative on Sustainable Cocoa, inwhich living wages are a key objective (see alsoSDGs 8 and 12).//On several requirements for the acceleratedpursuit of targets, there is now greater urgency asa result of the COVID 19 pandemic.to provide access routes to employment for allparts of the population, especially women andyoung people, on whom the impact has beengreatest.to combat poverty among those in low incomebrackets by means of additional targetedmeasures as well as to increase the incentives totake up employment.to enforce the statutory obligation to pay theminimum wage, which should primarily beachieved through more stringent checks, asthere are hundreds of thousands of cases inwhich employers illegally pay less than theminimum wage.to combine economic recovery in partnercountries with the fight against poverty and thecreation of decent work for everyone.to strengthen social security systems, especiallyhealth insurance schemes, and to develop riskfinancing to cover poor and vulnerable sectionsof the population against disasters and climateshocks.to step up the development of multi-stakeholder partnerships.//Relevant indicators andexemplary trends.In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 2 is covered by three indicators in twocategories. Farming Nitrogen surplus in agriculture andorganic farming. Food security Supporting good governance inthe achievement of adequate nutrition worldwide.//The indicator organic farming, which is examinedbelow, shows the area of land that is devoted toorganic farming on farms subject to verificationprocedures under the organic farming legislationof the EU, expressed as a percentage of the totalarea of land used for agriculture. Organic farmingis a resource-saving form of farming that haswide-ranging beneficial effects on the climate, theenvironment and nature. //Over the past few years, although the organicallyfarmed area in Germany has steadily increased, therate of increase has not been fast enough. If thistrend were to continue, the target of organicfarming on 20% of Germany’s agricultural land by2030 would not be achieved.//Context, challenges and coreactivities since 2016In 2019, according to the UN Food and AgricultureOrganization (FAO) estimates, more than twobillion people worldwide suffered from a lack ofessential vitamins and minerals (malnutrition).Some 690 million people were affected by chronicundernourishment, i.e. by hunger. Some 98% ofthe people suffering from hunger live in developing countries. According to FAO estimates made in2020, an additional 80 to 130 million people may besuffering from chronic hunger as a result of theCOVID-19 pandemic. The German Governmentsupports the human rights-based approach torealisation of the right to adequate food. The keyto global food security is sustainable and resilientagriculture.//The political focus in Germany is not only onpromoting sustainable agriculture but also, andprimarily, on environmentally, economically andsocially sustainable as well as nutritionally balanced and healthy diets. The main foundations ofthe food, agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectorsare natural resources such as soil, water, air andbiodiversity. Sustainable, responsible managementof these resources and the preservation of agricultural land are essential if continuing high-qualityfood production and food security are to beguaranteed in Germany. An important instrumentin the pursuit of these objectives is the CommonAgricultural Policy (CAP) of the European Union. Inthe negotiations and development process for thenew funding period starting in 2023, the GermanGovernment is campaigning for a higher level ofgreen ambition within the CAP. For example, theprevious requirements for the maintenance ofdirect payments (conditionality) are being amended with a view to better protecting the environment and the climate. Another key element arethe eco-schemes, which will in future serve tosupport additional environmental and climateefforts on the part of the agricultural sector. Inthis context, transferable learning and practicalexperience of organic farming will play animportant role in future throughout the food,agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors. Inaddition, digital technology will gain increasingsignificance in agriculture by contributing to moreefficient use of resources and simplifying workprocesses. //Within the framework of international development cooperation, Germany is supporting theestablishment and development of sustainableagriculture in partner countries of the GlobalSouth. //Close cooperation with the Food and AgricultureOrganization (FAO), the World Food Programme(WFP) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD): In cooperation withthese United Nations food and agricultureentities, Germany supports the realisation ofthe right to adequate nutrition.//Support for international networks: In this area,Germany primarily supports the establishmentand development of international gene banksand information systems for the preservation ofbiodiversity and the sustainable use of geneticresources, subject to fair conditions of access.//International research cooperation in the fieldof global nutrition: Germany supports international agricultural research where its findingsare freely accessible as a public asset. Suchcooperative ventures are a central source ofturnkey innovations designed to increaseproductivity, sustainably transform foodsystems, promote agroecology and adapt to theconsequences of climate change.//The special One World – No Hunger initiative:Since 2014, in the framework of this specialinitiative, Germany has made food security,agriculture and rural development priorities ofits development policy. Providing more thanEUR 2 billion a year, it is the second-largestbilateral donor to this initiative after the UnitedStates//Reinforcing political, institutional and legalgovernance in the realm of food security: In2018, a total of EUR 223 million, representing18.3% of Germany’s ODA (Official DevelopmentAssistance) expenditure on food security, wasdevoted to governance, compared with 16.7% in2016. //Establishment of Green Innovation Centres andCentres of Excellence: Germany has establishedGreen Innovation Centres in 15 African partnercountries. The purpose of these centres is toimprove regional food supplies, increase theincome of smallholdings and create jobs. Inaddition, Centres of Excellence on climatechange and sustainable land management havebeen established in Southern and West Africa.//Establishment and support of the SustainableAgricultural Supply Chain Initiative: Thismulti-stakeholder partnership, which theGerman Government initiated in 2018, comprises more than 70 stakeholders from theprivate sector, civil society and politics. It hasset itself the aim of achieving more sustainability in global agricultural supply chains andimproving the living conditions of smallholders. It focuses especially on living incomes andresource-efficient, deforestation-free supplychains.//• The Arable Farming Strategy adopted by theGerman Government is intended to set outoptions and pathways for making arablefarming sustainable – that is, environmentallysound, economically viable and socially accepted. Relevant areas include improving soilconservation and fertility, increasing cropdiversity and extending crop rotation, usingfertiliser more efficiently and reducing nutrientsurpluses, using and developing resistant andsite-adapted varieties and species, preservingand fostering farmland biodiversity, anddeveloping climate-adapted cultivationstrategies.//Intensified efforts to make the transition toorganic farming: Not only will this help Germany to achieve its target of having 20% of itsagricultural land organically farmed by 2030. Itwill also support the Farm to Fork Strategy ofthe European Commission and so help achievethe aim of sustainable farming.//On several requirements for the acceleratedpursuit of targets, there is now greater urgency asa result of the COVID 19 pandemic.to combine economic recovery measures inpartner countries with action to ensure foodsecurity and the establishment of sustainablefood and agriculture systems – for whichreason Germany made some EUR 2.3 billionavailable in 2020 alone for food security, ruraldevelopment and agriculture to alleviate theimpact of the pandemic and will continue thiscommitment in 2021 and subsequent years.to foster the development of multi-stakeholderpartnerships (see also SDGs 8 and 12).to promote organic farming worldwide so as toincrease the resilience of agricultural systems,especially in countries of the Global South.//Improving the health of all people on Earth is a central concern of the 2030 Agenda. Goodhealth is a goal of sustainable development but also its prerequisite and result. Monitoring,promoting and providing for it is a human rights obligation. The crucial requirement in thiscontext is universal health coverage or UHC, i.e. access for everyone to affordable healthcare of appropriate quality.//The COVID 19 pandemic has shown what drastic effects such an outbreak and the accompanying strain on health services can have on all areas of life – on public and private life aswell as economic activity. In this respect SDG 3 is connected not only to SDG 2 (no hunger),SDG 6 (drinking water and sanitation) and SDG 13 (climate action) but also to all the othergoals.//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 3 is covered by nine indicators in threecategories.• Health and nutrition: Premature mortalityamong women and men, smoking rates amongadolescents and adults, the obesity rate amongchildren and adolescents and the obesity rateamong adults.• Air pollution: Emissions of air pollutants andshare of the population with excessive exposureto PM10.Global health: Germany’s contribution to globalpandemic prevention and response.// The last of these listed indicators is examinedbelow by way of an example; it is intended todepict Germany’s willingness to assume increasingresponsibility in the international effort to combatthe pandemic worldwide. The indicator coversexpenditure and pledges made by Germany forglobal pandemic prevention and response programmes. It excludes programmes designed tocontain the COVID-19 pandemic (see the palerpart of the green column for 2020 seen in thegraph). //Germany’s pledges for global healthcare funding,that is to say for global pandemic prevention andresponse programmes, particularly in countries ofthe Global South, have been continuously increased over the past few years. The aim is to raiseGermany’s contribution to global pandemicprevention and response substantially from its2019 level in the period up to 2030.//Enhancing prevention and health literacy,especially digital health literacy, in everyday lifeand protecting public health: The PreventionAct (Präventionsgesetz) raises the standard ofprevention and health promotion, especially inschools, child daycare centres and workplaces,by means of services provided by the healthinsurance funds and services for the earlydetection of diseases.//The Protection against Measles Act (Masernschutzgesetz), adopted in 2020, stipulates thatproof of adequate vaccination against measlesor of immunity to measles must be presentedfor all those who are looked after in communalfacilities or who work there.//Strengthening the public health service: Theadoption of the 2020 Pact for the Public HealthService provided for measures to upgrade thehuman, technical and digital resources of thecounty or district health authorities.//Strengthening the health service infrastructure,especially its digital infrastructure: A Future ofHospitals Act (Krankenhauszukunftsgesetz) wasadopted in 2020, particularly with a view toexpanding the digitalisation of hospitals andimproving their IT security.//Digitalisation of the healthcare system toimprove the quality of urban and rural medicalcare and to meet the challenges of demographicchange: A system of electronic patient files isbeing introduced; from 2021, health insurancefunds are to make it available to all theirmembers.//Implementation of the National Reduction andInnovation Strategy for Sugar, Fats and Salt inProcessed Foods: Processed foods are to containfewer calories and fats and less sugar and salt.This strategy is focused clearly on ready-madeproducts, particularly those that are designed toappeal to children and adolescents.//Closer coordination of global health players andreinforcement of national health systems: Ajoint initiative was launched by Germany,Norway and Ghana for the preparation of aGlobal Action Plan for Healthy Lives andWell-being for All (SDG 3 GAP), which wasadopted by the World Health Organization(WHO) together with 11 other multilateralorganisations in 2019. Following the accessionof the ILO at the start of 2021, a total of 13organisations are now involved.//Germany also supports the activities which theUnited Nations has announced for the 2021-2030 Decade of Healthy Ageing being run bythe WHO.//Strengthening global health players: Germany isa reliable partner to many multilateral healthorganisations, particularly the WHO, Gavi, theVaccine Alliance, and the Global Fund to fightAIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM). In thisvein, Germany was able to increase its fundingfor the WHO from EUR 181 million in 2016-2017 to EUR 313 million in 2018-2019. Thefunds provided to fight the pandemic bring thetotal for 2020 up to EUR 564 million. Similarly,the funding for the GFATM was raised fromEUR 210 million in 2016 to EUR 350 million in2020. Other important international partnerswith which Germany cooperates are the UnitedNations Population Fund (UNFPA), the GlobalFinancing Facility (GFF) and the InternationalPlanned Parenthood Federation (IPPF), towhich the German Government is providingaggregate funding of about EUR 190 million in2020 and 2021. //Stepping up multilateral cooperation on thebasis of the One Health approach: Germany hasbeen doing this by initiating the establishmentof the One Health High Level Expert Panel toadvise the WHO, the FAO, the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the UnitedNations Environment Programme (UNEP) andby supporting its work.//Global access to and global distribution ofvaccines, especially in the context of the COVID19 pandemic.ACT Accelerator: Germany is a foundingmember of the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT)Accelerator and its second-largest donor. TheAccelerator is a global platform for the development of COVID-19 vaccines, therapies anddiagnostics.COVAX: Germany actively supports the UnitedNations’ COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access(COVAX) initiative, the aim of which is to obtainreasonable prices, especially for poorer countries, through bulk ordering and to distributevaccines worldwide. Germany is providing theCOVAX facility with EUR 1.08 billion to procurevaccines for the world’s 92 poorest countries aspart of a total allocation to the ACT Acceleratorof about EUR 2.2 billion.//Bolstering research and development forvaccines against pathogens that may causeepidemics: Germany plays an active role in theinternational CEPI initiative (Coalition forEpidemic Preparedness Innovations) and is providing it, as part of the aforementioned ACTAccelerator allocation, with a total of EUR 350million for 2020 and 2021. // Initiative on Rights-based Family Planning andMaternal Health: In this initiative, Germanyhelps to ensure that the right conditions arecreated in 21 partner countries for the avoidance of unwanted pregnancies and for professional medical assistance at births. Anotherpriority is access to comprehensive sexualityeducation, especially for adolescents and youngadults, to empower them to take independentinformed decisions about their health and toprotect women and girls effectively fromunwanted pregnancies. Since 2016, the GermanGovernment has made resources amounting toabout EUR 480 million available for thisinitiative in its development cooperationbudget.//Lessons learned, areas requiringaction and anticipated priority areas.Pandemic prevention and preparedness measures require constant improvement.Health system structures require furthermodernisation through innovation and digitalisation.The care system needs to be improved andreinforced.There is a need to keep building capacity for themanufacture of vaccines and other importantpharmaceutical products in Germany, Europe,and developing and newly industrialisedcountries.Research into vaccines, medicines, treatmentsand diagnostics has to be accelerated in Germany and Europe.There is a need to strengthen global healthentities and improve their capacity for cooperation. There is a need to strengthen global healthstructures with due regard to the lessonslearned from COVID-19, particularly byadvancing the proposal for an internationaltreaty on pandemic prevention and preparedness with a view to building national, regionaland global capacity for greater resilience in theface of future pandemics. Investment is needed to improve pandemicprevention and preparedness, particularly bystrengthening the political, financial andinstitutional position of the World HealthOrganization to enhance its response capability.There is a need to make more use of the OneHealth approach nationally, regionally and inthe context of international cooperation, sincehuman and animal health and environmentalfactors are closely intertwined. National health systems must be continuouslystrengthened to guarantee access to essentialservices, including sexual and reproductiveservices, and the exercise of reproductive rights,even in crises, as these are prerequisites forstability, welfare and global health. Access to preventive measures of sexual andreproductive health, including comprehensivesexuality education, and to related rights mustbe maintained. There is a need for more dovetailing of multilateral and bilateral activities as well as for anextension of cooperation among all key playersin the health system– the public sector, theprivate sector and the academic community. //With SDG 4, the international community has undertaken to ensure inclusive and equitablequality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. Education has a keyrole to play if the Sustainable Development Goals are to be achieved. Other SDGs havereciprocal links with education, whether explicitly or implicitly, especially SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth), SDG 10 (reducedinequalities) and SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production). Education is a crucialfactor in determining people’s opportunities to develop their individual skills, realise theirprofessional aims and participate in and shape their society. Education is a human right.High-quality institutional education courses and social conditions that permit successfullearning both inside and outside educational institutions are keys to the exercise of thatright.//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,four indicators are assigned to SDG 4 in twocategories.Education Early school leavers and 30 to34-year-olds with a tertiary or post-secondarynon-tertiary level of education.Prospects for families All-day care provisionfor children from birth to the age of 2 and forchildren aged 3 to 5.// The early school leavers indicator is examinedbelow to illustrate the challenge of enabling alladolescents and young adults to obtain educational qualifications.//The indicator shows the percentage of all peoplein the 18-24 age bracket who have neither gaineda university entrance qualification, such as anAbitur or Fachhochschulreife, nor completed acourse of vocational training, and who are notcurrently undergoing training or continuingeducation. The indicator value rose slightly from9.5% in 2014 to 10.3% in 2019, which means thatthe trend has been moving in the wrong direction.If the current trend were to continue, the target of9.5% for 2030 would not be met.//Education for sustainable development (ESD) isone of Germany’s key objectives, both at homeand abroad.//Levels of educational attainment and rates ofparticipation in education in Germany are high inall sectors of the education system. Despite theimprovements with regard to equal opportunities,however, social background still influences youngpeople’s educational opportunities and futureprospects. An important political aim throughoutthe education system is to establish equality ofopportunity. The digital lesson formats deployedduring the COVID-19 pandemic have madeexplicit the extent to which socio-economic statusinfluences young people’s education opportunities. In a highly developed economy such asGermany’s, there is a constantly increasingdemand for skilled labour. In addition to tertiaryqualifications from diverse types of institutions ofhigher education, particular importance attachesin Germany to the practice-based dual system oftraining, which offers options to obtain tertiaryqualifications through advanced vocationaleducation and training. Since it does not dependon possessing a university entrance qualification,the dual training system enables many people toobtain access to the skilled labour market and toattractive further qualification opportunitiesregardless of their socio-economic backgroundsand their origins.//In the context of development cooperation andthe German Government’s other internationalactivities, Germany provides particular support topartner countries in the realms of extended basiceducation, vocational education and training,higher education and university partnerships.//• Adoption of the National Action Plan onEducation for Sustainable Development in 2017:Germany assigns a key role to ESD in its pursuitof the 17 SDGs and supports education processes based on the ideal of lifelong learning forsustainable development. Working in closecooperation, the federal and Länder governments have drawn up a Global Developmentguidance framework that contains recommendations for educational authorities and schoolson putting ESD into practice in curricula,teacher training and the development ofschools as sustainable organisations.//The funding priority and initiative VocationalTraining for Sustainable Development promotes key green skills for climate-friendly,resource-efficient action at work.//Joint federal-Länder initiatives to increaseeducation opportunities for everyone: Examplesthat may be cited in this context include the“School empowers” (Schule macht stark)initiative, designed to support schools with ahigh percentage of socially disadvantagedpupils, and an initiative entitled Graduationand continuation – Education chains up to thevocational training qualification.//Increasing the availability and raising the qualityof child daycare: These aims are pursuedthrough the 2019 Act on Good Early ChildhoodEducation and Care (Gute-KiTa-Gesetz) and the2020-2021 Investment Programme for Childcare Funding, which was created in response tothe COVID-19 pandemic.//Expansion of all-day care facilities for primarypupils: An investment programme to acceleratethe development of the infrastructure of all-daycare facilities for primary school pupils waslaunched at the end of 2020; the GermanGovernment is providing a total of EUR 750million in federal funds for investments underthis programme.//Development of technological skills: Mathematics, IT, science and technology are cornerstonesof education in the digital age and as such areknown collectively by the German acronymMINT, much as STEM (science, technology,engineering and mathematics) is used elsewhere. The MINT Action Plan of 2019 providesfor new overarching support initiatives and aspecialised information campaign.//• Reinforcement of vocational education andtraining: The Federal Republic, by revising theVocational Training Act (Berufsbildungsgesetz)and particularly through the introduction ofthe new internationally compatible professional bachelor’s and professional master’s degrees,has strengthened advanced vocational education and training and so widened careerprospects for trainees in the dual trainingsystem. At the same time, the correspondingfunding opportunities have been considerablyexpanded through grants awarded under theUpgrading Training Assistance Act (Aufstiegs-BAföG). //The Federal Government, the Länder and therepresentative bodies of business and labour areall committed to the continuous improvementand updating of vocational training. Initiativessuch as the federal programme to secureapprenticeships and coordinated measures putin place by the Alliance for Initial and FurtherTraining are helping to maintain the level oftraining during the COVID-19 pandemic.//To support the residential centres for child andadolescent education that have been closedduring the COVID-19 pandemic, the organisations running these centres have been receivingliquidity grants in 2020 and 2021 through theSpecial Programme for Child and YouthEducation and Welfare.//Package of measures for the integration ofrefugees with academic potential: With the aidof this programme, which was launched in2015, more than 20,000 refugees have been ableto enrol in mainstream courses of highereducation in Germany, while others have takenpreparatory courses for higher education. //The UNESCO Global Action Programme onEducation for Sustainable Development and theUNESCO ESD for 2030 programme: Germany isa key partner of UNESCO and plays an activepart in the implementation of its ESD programmes.//Germany funds and reinforces key multilateraleducation initiatives. At the heart of its effortsin this field is the Global Partnership forEducation (GPE), to which the German Government pledged EUR 141 million for the 2018-2022 period. Germany’s funding has beenfurther increased, particularly in view of thechallenges arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. Of its EUR 75 million contribution to theGPE for 2020, for example, the German Government made EUR 25 million available for theCOVID-19 funding window to assist partnercountries in alleviating the impact of the crisisand dealing with its consequences.//The Education Cannot Wait (ECW) fund: This isthe central global fund for education in emergency situations and chronic crises. Since 2017,Germany has supported the ECW fund with atotal of EUR 68.8 million to make educationpossible in refugee camps and host communities and to offer children a brighter future.//Education is an important element of Germandevelopment cooperation. The educationstrategy of 2015 entitled “Creating equitableopportunities for quality education” forms thebasis for targeted assistance to partner countries in the areas of extended basic education,vocational education and training and highereducation.//The schools partnership initiative PASCH(Schools: Partners for the Future): In theframework of Germany’s foreign cultural andeducation policy, more than 600,000 pupils inmore than 120 partner countries are learningGerman and cultivating intercultural dialogueas an international learning community in aglobal network of some 2,000 schools.//Development Policy School Exchange Programme (ENSA): This programme supportsexisting and new school twinning arrangements between general or vocational secondaryschools in Germany and their counterparts inAfrican, Asian, Latin American and South-EastEuropean countries. These collaborationsenable them to campaign together in schooland everyday life, through exchange visits, forglobal sustainable development.//As the world’s largest bilateral donor in therealm of education (EUR 2.1 billion in 2018),Germany banks on close cooperation betweengovernment and business to assist partnercountries in establishing high-quality, inclusive,practice-based vocational training systemsreflecting the needs of the labour market.Germany has stepped up its worldwidesupport for cooperation in the field of highereducation through manifold activities ofindividual federal ministries, for instance inthe framework of centres of excellence andresearch funding, as well as through theCentres of African Excellence of the GermanAcademic Exchange Service (DAAD) and itsexcellence programmes, such as BilateralSDG Graduate Schools. What all fundedactivities have in common is that they areintended to reach “agents of change”, ormultipliers, in partner countries so as tosupport or inspire transformation processes.The German Government also sees digitalprogress as a potential driver of equalopportunities in education. Accordingly, theFederal Ministry for Economic Cooperationand Development is pursuing a strategy builton the following three pillars: (1) development of ICT infrastructure; (2) support fordigital training opportunities; (3) development of the skills required for the digitaltransformation. For example, the BMZ usesICT in the education sector to train teachers,establish innovative learning formats andenable a more efficient, data-supportededucational policy. Examples of its efforts inthis direction are the upgrading of digitalskills of women and girls through the#eSkills4Girls initiative and the training ofworkers in the ICT sector through the DigitalSkills Accelerator Africa (DSAA) project.//Lessons learned, areas requiringaction and anticipated priority areas.There is a need to establish equality of opportunity in all areas of the education system.Education for sustainable development (ESD)must be further developed so that the implementation of the National Action Plan onEducation for Sustainable Development can befurther expedited.There is a need to develop the technicalinfrastructure to create the right conditions forthe digital transition in the education sector aswell as providing for universal accessibility,regardless of socio-economic status.A legal right to all-day care provision forchildren of primary school age must be established.There is a need to support the expansion andfurther development of key multilateraleducation initiatives such as the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) and the EducationCannot Wait fund.More promotion of equal opportunities isneeded, along with the accompanying reduction of inequality in the education systems inpartner countries.More work is needed to reinforce high-quality,inclusive, practice-based vocational trainingsystems reflecting the needs of the labourmarket in partner countries.There is a need to support education throughdistance teaching and digital learning resources.//In the 2030 Agenda, achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls isfirmly enshrined as both a goal in its own right and an overarching theme of the entireagenda. More than 25 years after the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Womenand the adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action, various obstacles still prevent womenand girls from leading self-determined lives and from exercising an equal right to realisetheir potential for the good of society. These include violence against women and girls,uneven distribution of income and property and limited control over material assets, insufficient involvement in private and public decision-making, inequitable distribution of careand upbringing duties, and gender stereotypes. //Gender equality is an overarching theme of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.Firstly, the focus of SDG 5 is on ending all forms of discrimination against women and girls(target 5.1), eliminating all forms of violence against women and girls (target 5.2) and eliminating all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genitalmutilation (target 5.3); the other targets focus on the recognition of unpaid care and domestic work (target 5.4), women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunitiesfor leadership (target 5.5) and universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights (target 5.6). Economic empowerment of women and girls demonstrablyreduces child mortality and the number of unwanted pregnancies. Moreover, supportfor women contributes to the achievement of numerous other goals, especially SDG 1(no poverty), SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 3 (health), SDG 4 (quality education) and SDG 10(reduced inequalities).//Relevant indicators andexemplary trendsIn the German Sustainable Development Strategyfive indicators are assigned to SDG 5: The genderpay gap, women in management positions inbusiness and in the federal public service, theproportion of fathers receiving parental allowance, and the vocational qualification of womenand girls through German development cooperation.//The gender pay gap indicator is examined belowby way of an example to portray the genderequality situation in Germany.//According to official figures from the FederalStatistical Office, the average gross hourly pay ratefor women in 2020 was around 18% lower than theaverage pay rate for men. In 2014, the gap had beenaround 22%. In the event of a linear continuationof the slight narrowing of the gap by four percentage points that has occurred over the past fiveyears, however, the targets for 2020 and 2030 (amaximum differential of 10% in both cases) willnot be achieved.//The priorities of gender equality policy in Germanyare the prevention of violence against women andgirls, victim support and equal employmentopportunities for women. The last of theseobjectives includes the realisation of equal accessto management positions in politics, administration and the private sector, the continuingdevelopment and consistent implementation of agood work-life balance, systematic reduction ofthe gender pay gap and upgrading of socialoccupations. Existing inequalities between womenand men should not be exacerbated as a result ofthe COVID-19 pandemic. This means that weshould not see even more women taking on thebulk of unpaid domestic work and childcareduties and being in precarious employmentworldwide.1 The principle of leaving no onebehind also involves the inclusion of all peopleregardless of gender, particularly individuals andgroups who are marginalised and subject to1 https://data.unwomen.org/features/covid-19-and-gender-what-do-we-know-what-do-we-need-knowmultiple forms of discrimination. Gender equalitymust not be considered in isolation, because itinteracts with other aspects of people’s identity,such as sexual identity, sexual orientation, age,religious affiliation and disability. //When women worldwide are given the opportunity to realise their economic potential, the economyis not the only winner. Earning their own incomeas a result of having received adequate educationand training benefits women and girls themselvesbut also their families and the whole of society inpartner countries of the Global South.//The German Government is implementing aprogramme of action on the Istanbul Convention, the latter having entered into force inGermany in 2018. With the federal supportprogramme Ending Violence against WomenTogether, the German Government is providinga total of more than EUR 140 million from 2019to 2023 to assist the Länder and local authorities in further developing their aid structuresfor women affected by violence in line with realneeds. Since 2020, as part of a project funded bythe German Government, the German Institutefor Human Rights has been developing ablueprint for independent national reportingagencies on gender-based violence and onhuman trafficking. In seeking the establishmentof these two reporting agencies, the GermanGovernment is fulfilling important provisionsof the Istanbul Convention and the Council ofEurope Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. //Legal bases have been created, such as (1) theGender Equality Management Positions Act(Führungspositionen-Gesetz), which includesbinding gender quotas for the supervisoryboards of listed and fully co-determinedcompanies, (2) the Transparency in WageStructures Act (Entgelttransparenzgesetz) and (3)the Second Gender Equality ManagementPositions Act supplementing and amending theprovisions for the equal participation of womenin management positions in the private sectorand public service (Zweites Führungspositionen-Gesetz).//The equal participation of women in shapingsociety and in political decision-making in theBundestag, in the Länder parliaments and inlocal politics is being reinforced, for example,by means of mentoring programmes.//The gender pay gap is being narrowed by meansof the following measures.upgrading of social occupations, in whichwomen are predominantly employed,including the introduction of minimumwages in care occupations.continuous refinement of the parentalallowance to foster balanced arrangementsbetween partners, resulting in an earlierreturn to work for mothers which willfurther gender equality in the labour market.mentoring programmes, one example beingthe mentoring programme run by theWomen in Culture and the Media projectoffice of the German Cultural Council.//United Nations Security Council: One of themain priorities of Germany’s term of membership in 2019 and 2020 was the Security Council’s Women, Peace and Security Agenda.Thanks to German endeavours, references towomen’s participation and their protectionfrom sexual violence have been inserted intothe mandates of numerous UN peace missions.The range of the analyses conducted by the UNSecurity Council has been widened through thesystematic hearing of knowledgeable contributors from civil society. Acting on a Germaninitiative, the Security Council adopted Resolution 2467 on support for the victims of sexualviolence in conflicts and more vigorous prosecution of perpetrators.//Germany is working on the systematic implementation of the initiative for strengtheningwomen’s economic empowerment that wasadopted in 2015 during Germany’s Presidencyof the G7 as well as striving to promote genderequality. This applies especially to the target ofincreasing the number of women and girls indeveloping countries gaining vocationalqualifications through G7 measures by onethird by 2030. In the framework of Germany’sinternational cooperation, some 863,000women and girls were supported by vocationaltraining measures in 2018.//In the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative(We-Fi), Germany actively supports the fundingof women entrepreneurs and the improvementof basic conditions for women’s engagement inbusiness activity. Germany is the largest donorto We-Fi, having contributed EUR 50 million toits multi-donor fund.//Germany supports signatory states in implementing the Istanbul Convention, the Councilof Europe Convention on preventing andcombating violence against women anddomestic violence.//By means of the cross-sectoral strategy “GenderEquality in German Development Policy”Germany has since 2014 been pursuing astrategy involving three tracks.Integration of a gender perspective into alldevelopment policy-related strategies andprojects (gender mainstreaming).Targeted projects designed to eliminatediscrimination against women and girls andto promote women’s rights.Systematic embedding of women’s rightsand equal rights in development policydialogues with partner countries.//Gender equality is a priority of the 2021-2022German Government Action Plan for HumanRights. Among the objectives of the action planare political participation, voice and representation, equal pay, sexual and reproductive healthand rights, and an end to female genitalmutilation (FGM).//• The objective of equal participation of womenand men in management positions in thepublic service is to be achieved by 2025 on thebasis of the Second Gender Equality Management Positions Act, the bill for which wasadopted by the Federal Cabinet in January 2021.• There is a need to empower adolescents andyoung adults to make non-stereotypical careerchoices.• Application of the provisions of the Transparency in Wage Structures Act must be consistentlyenforced.• Long-term, specific and verifiable sustainabilitytargets for family policy are to be formulatedand must be achieved by 2030.• A legal right to all-day care for primary schoolpupils must be introduced by 2026.• There is a need for worldwide elimination oflegal obstacles and social prejudices whichrestrict women’s career choices and which,according to the World Bank, still exist in about90 countries around the world.• Development programmes for the promotionof vocational education and training in partnercountries must be systematically continuedwith a view to achieving an increase of one thirdin the number of vocationally qualified womenand girls in partner countries over the periodfrom 2015 to 2030. To this end, the followingmeasures are to be taken.Under the Special Initiative on Training andJob Creation at least 30,000 women in eightAfrican partner countries are to benefit fromtraining and upskilling measures by 2025.With the aid of specific initiatives, digitalskills are to be taught to girls in particular, soas to enhance their educational and employment prospects in an increasingly digitalworld. The #eSkills4Girls scheme may becited here by way of example. //The quality and availability of water impact directly on health and habitats. Agriculturalproduction, industrial growth and ecosystems all depend on water. The availability of waterfor all uses – particularly for drinking, for hygiene and for producing and processing food– can be the key to well-being and good health. As a source of energy, a transport mediumand a raw material, water is also an important economic factor. Water resources throughoutthe world, however, are under pressure from pollution and overuse as well as from population growth, urbanisation and climate change. //In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,four indicators are assigned to SDG 6 in twocategories.Water quality: Phosphorus in flowing watersand nitrate in groundwater.Drinking water and sanitation: Number ofpeople gaining new or upgraded access todrinking water through support from Germanyand the number of people gaining new orimproved access to sanitation through supportfrom Germany. //Since 2008, the number of groundwater monitoring points where the nitrate ceiling of 50 mg/l isnot exceeded has remained virtually unchanged.The goal of keeping below that ceiling at allmonitoring points has not been achieved; nor isthe indicator value discernibly moving in thatdirection. The groundwater is supposed to bebelow the maximum nitrate concentration of 50mg/l at every monitoring point by 2030. //Since the supply of clean water and sanitation isassured in Germany, the main focal point ofnational efforts to achieve SDG 6 is the improvement of water quality (target 6.3). The EuropeanWater Framework Directive has already laid downobjectives for the quality of surface water andgroundwater in the EU, and these have beentransposed into national law in the Federal WaterAct (Wasserhaushaltsgesetz) and various ordinances. The targets must be met by 2027 at the latest.Despite considerable progress in the protection ofwater resources, almost all of the 9,800 bodies ofsurface water and more than a third of the 1,200bodies of groundwater in Germany have notachieved good ecological status or good ecologicalpotential within the meaning of the WaterFramework Directive. The main reasons for thisare overbuilding, straightening and transversestructures interrupting the flow of watercourses.The chemical status of some 25% of the bodies ofgroundwater in Germany is bad because of highnitrate values (see also SDG 14). //With the revisions of fertiliser applicationlegislation in 2017 and 2020, the GermanGovernment has made a major contribution topreventive action to protect groundwater,surface water and coastal waters from thedamaging effects of nutrient inputs.//To protect water resources, the legal provisionson fracking that have been in force since 11 February 2017 provide for restrictions on the use offracking technology in Germany.//With a view to protecting water as a preciousresource in the long term, as part of the UNWater Action Decade (2018-2028) the FederalMinistry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety conducted a twoyear National Dialogue on Water with stakeholders from October 2018 to October 2020 andhas also been engaged in a National Citizens’Water Dialogue. On the basis of these dialogues,the Federal Environment Ministry is drawingup a proposal for a national water strategy,which is due to be presented in June 2021 andwill then be discussed within the FederalGovernment and with the Länder.//The German Government is the world’ssecond-largest bilateral donor to developmentcooperation in the water sector. Water is apriority of bilateral development cooperationin more than 20 partner countries.//Together with partner countries, the GermanGovernment is committed to the provision ofthe population with safe, affordable andconstant access to drinking water and sanitation and follows a human rights-based approach in pursuit of that aim. From 2013 to2017, Germany assisted partner countries withODA funds totalling more than EUR 3.3 billionfor this purpose.//Germany is promoting the reinforcement ofwater governance in the United Nations with aview to faster achievement of the water-relatedtargets of the 2030 Agenda for SustainableDevelopment.//Germany supports processes and initiativeslaunched by the United Nations, in regionalframeworks and through strategic partnerships.//The German Government is supporting the UNcoordination committee for the reinforcementof global monitoring and the review of water-related targets.//Germany hosts the headquarters of the GlobalWater Operators’ Partnership Alliance (GWOPA)of UN Habitat in Bonn and has assisted supplycompanies during the coronavirus pandemic.//Germany is participating in the development ofa global indicator-based monitoring system forwater quality and water resource management.//Germany manages and is further developing aglobal database for water quality data as part ofthe UNEP programme GEMS/Water.//The German Government is supporting theGlobal Water Partnership with a view toreinforcing worldwide implementation of theprinciple of integrated water resource management.//Germany sponsors resolutions within the UN onthe human rights to safe drinking water andadequate sanitation.//Germany has been developing and testingstrategic technologies and viable blueprints forsustainable management of water resources.//The German Government supports cross-border water cooperation in various parts of theworld, not least as part of its preventive foreignand security policy.//Germany is implementing the global UNECEWater Convention and its Protocol on Waterand Health and supporting the accession ofother states to the UNECE Water Conventionand the UN Convention on the Law of theNon-navigational Uses of International Watercourses//Lessons learned, areas requiringaction and anticipated priority areas.The German Government is aiming for arevision of the Waste Water Charges Act(Abwasserabgabengesetz).The provisions on wastewater purification arecontinuously adapted to the latest state of theart. At the EU level, uniform standards for thebest available techniques (BAT) are set in BATconclusions, which must be transposed intonational law and observed by industrial andcommercial enterprises.Regulatory moves to reduce the release ofchemical substances into water bodies wherethe release may have unknown or unexplainedeffects are a source of controversy. Accordingly,following two and a half years of dialogue withstakeholders on the planned Trace SubstanceStrategy, recommendations were formulated in2019 and were then tested and evaluated in aone-year pilot phase. The new Federal Centrefor Trace Substances will now press on with thework on the Trace Substance Strategy.The German Government is promoting theintegrative approach of SDG 6 with its nexus ofwater, energy and food security.Germany will host a high-level conference on 1July 2021 in preparation for the 2023 UNMid-term Review Conference on the WaterAction Decade (2018-2028).//A secure, environmentally friendly and affordable energy supply is a fundamental prerequisite of successful social and economic development. The manner in which energy is madeavailable and consumed has a crucial influence on the parameters of sustainable development and on attainment of the SDGs. The guiding principles of national climate andenergy policy, as well as external energy policy and development policy, are therefore thedecarbonisation of energy systems using renewable energy sources as a contribution togreenhouse gas neutrality by 2045, energy conservation, and the greatest possible energyefficiency.//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 7 is covered by four indicators in two categories.Conservation: Final energy productivity andprimary energy consumption. Renewable energy: Share of energy fromrenewable sources in gross final energy consumption and share of electricity from renewable energy sources in gross electricity consumption. //The German Government had set itself the aim ofincreasing the share of electricity from renewableenergy sources in gross electricity consumption toat least 35% by 2020 and at least 65% by 2030.Greenhouse gases are to be cut by 88% by 2040,and greenhouse gas neutrality is to be reached by2045. Since 2005, the share of renewable energysources in electricity generation has risen, particularly because of the increased use of wind power,photovoltaics and biomass. //The national pursuit of SDG 7 is assured by theenergy transition, which sets the framework inGermany for sustainable energy policy withlong-term goals. The energy transition is also a keyelement of German climate policy (cf. SDG 13 onthe Climate Action Programme 2030 and theClimate Action Plan 2050). It is tightly embeddedwithin the European context and is being implemented in cooperation with international partners. In recent decades, energy consumption hasbeen reduced while economic output has grown,and the share of energy from renewable sources ingross final energy consumption has increased considerably. As a result of the increasing supply ofrenewable energy and greater efficiency, netdependence on fossil energy imports has alsodecreased. //Germany has set ambitious goals in the area ofenergy efficiency. In 2019, targets were set inthe Energy Efficiency Strategy 2050 and theClimate Action Plan 2030 to cut Germany’sprimary energy consumption by 30% by 2008and adopt numerous measures to reduceenergy consumption and CO2 emissions. Forthe buildings sector, the Climate ActionProgramme emphasises increased support,carbon pricing and information provision,among other areas.//It remains to be decided how the 2030 energyefficiency target should be amended in linewith the updated targets for cutting greenhousegas emissions.//The share of energy from renewable sources ingross final energy consumption is to rise to 60%by 2050. The intermediate targets are increasesof 30% by 2030 and 45% by 2040. The share ofelectricity from renewable energy sources ingross electricity consumption is to grow to 65%by 2030. Power generation from coal and ligniteis to be completely phased out by 2038 at thelatest, while the development of energygeneration from renewable sources continuesto forge ahead.//Germany is involved at the EU level and in alarge number of multilateral organisations,forums and initiatives to help shape theinternational dialogue on forward-lookingenergy policy, e.g. in the framework of theCouncil bodies of the European Union, in theG7 and G20, and in the wider context of climatenegotiations, the International RenewableEnergy Agency (IRENA), the InternationalEnergy Agency (IEA), the UN initiative Sustainable Energy for All (SEforALL), the InternationalSolar Alliance (ISA), the World Energy Council(WEC), the Africa-EU Energy Partnership(AEEP), the Clean Energy Ministerial (CEM), theBerlin Energy Transition Dialogue (BETD), theInternational Renewable Energy Conferences(IRECs) and the Renewable Energy PolicyNetwork for the 21st Century (REN21), as wellas in regional collaborations like the Pentalateral Energy Forum or the North Seas EnergyCooperation.//Membership since 2019 of the Powering PastCoal Alliance (PPCA) to advance the globalphase-out of coal power and a just transition;participation in the Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction (GlobalABC) seeking atransition to climate neutrality in the buildingsand construction sector; involvement in theEnergy Sector Management Assistance Program(ESMAP) of the World Bank; participation inthe Energising Development partnership//Internationally, the German Governmentintends to foster understanding of the energytransition and help create the conditions inwhich it can take place so that sustainableenergy supply can become a global reality.Formalised energy partnerships with strategically important partner countries are the keyelement of bilateral energy cooperation. Thesepartnerships involve high-level intergovernmental energy dialogues that address specificchallenges, promote international experiencesharing on matters relating to the energytransition and offer German companies aplatform to cooperate with companies andinstitutions in partner countries in a way that gains acceptance for the pursuit of sustainability. One of the current activities in the framework of research and innovation support is thedevelopment of universally deployable energystorage systems for domestic use, particularlyin hitherto underserved parts of the world. Thepotential for the establishment of a greenhydrogen economy, including the expansion ofrenewable energies and export logistics, is beingexplored and developed in cooperation withvarious countries in West and Southern Africaand elsewhere around the world. The GermanGovernment is supporting the establishment ofsustainable energy systems and the expansion ofinfrastructure for energy access in 70 partnercountries through technical and financialcooperation.//In least developed countries (LDCs), sustainableenergy strategies based on renewable energysources are being developed, for example,within the framework of the Bilateral TrustFund (BTF). Multilateral initiatives like theAfrican Renewable Energy Initiative (AREI) andthe multi-donor platform GET.invest areworking to combat energy poverty in LDCs inAfrica. //Mobilisation of private capital through varioustailored funding instruments, including theFacility for Energy Inclusion, the GET FiTProgramme, the Geothermal Risk MitigationFacilities, GET.invest and the Regional LiquiditySupport Facility; efforts at the national andinternational levels to reduce subsidies for fossilfuels.//As of 2021, the German Climate Action Programme includes a national emissions tradingscheme to provide blanket pricing of CO2emissions from heating and transport. Inaddition, the abandonment of coal-fired powergeneration by 2038 at the latest will make amajor contribution to the reduction of CO2emissions in the energy sector. With the 2017reform of the Renewable Energy Sources Act(Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz), support forrenewables was switched in principle to anauction system. //The German Seventh Energy Research Programme, entitled Innovations for the EnergyTransition, pursues a holistic approach tosupport policy in order to address current andemerging challenges. There is a new focus ontechnology and innovation transfer throughthe living labs of the energy transition, a newpillar of support for the process of readyinginnovative solutions for the market. Besides thekey research areas of energy efficiency andrenewables, the programme places an emphasison cross-sectoral and cross-system issuesrelating to the energy transition, such asdigitalisation, sector coupling and community-focused energy transition research. TheGerman Government makes around EUR 1.3billion available annually within the frameworkof the Seventh Energy Research Programme.//Germany has set itself ambitious energy-efficiency goals, for example in the Energy Concept, its blueprint for energy policy, and in theEnergy Efficiency Strategy 2050, and has alreadyachieved a great deal. Nevertheless, great scopefor savings and requirements for further actionstill remain.//Further efforts are essential in the field ofrenewable energy in the transport sector. In2018, the share of energy from renewablesources in gross final energy consumption inGermany in that sector was 5.6%.//The 2030 Agenda describes the transition to a more sustainable economy in which everycountry enjoys sustainable, sustained and inclusive economic development and there isdecent work for all. The central issue is how to reconcile and generate economic strength,protection of the environment, the climate and natural resources, and social responsibility at the national and international levels. Establishing the right to work and the corelabour standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO) is intended to safeguardand create decent work. The 2030 Agenda expressly acknowledges the importance, responsibility and diversity of the private sector – ranging from micro-enterprises to cooperativesto multinationals – in relation to sustainable development. In central Europe and especiallyin Germany, SMEs in particular – or, more accurately, the Mittelstand – play a significantrole.//Progress on SDG 8 is also pivotal to the pursuit of other SDGs – or they are mutually contingent – especially SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy), SDG 9 (industry,innovation and infrastructure), SDG 10 (reduced inequalities), SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production), SDG 13 (climate action) and SDG 17 (partnerships for the goals).//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 8 is covered by nine indicators in six categories.Resource conservation: Total raw materialproductivity.Government debt: Government deficit, structural deficit and debt.Provision for future economic stability: Ratio ofgross fixed capital formation to gross domesticproduct.Economic performance: Gross domesticproduct per capitaEmployment: Employment rate.Global supply chains: Number of members ofthe Textile Partnership.The indicator on gross fixed capital formation,which is explained in more detail below, isintended as an example demonstrating thereadiness to invest which is of such great importance to sustainable public and private investment.//The indicator shows the ratio of gross fixed capitalformation to nominal gross domestic product.This is also referred to as the investment ratio.The German Government’s goal is to keep theratio developing appropriately until 2030. In theshort to medium-term view, the indicator hasbeen moving in the right direction, with a slightrise from 20% in 2015 to 21.7% in 2019.//Economic growth is important for many reasons.The German Government, however, does notfocus on quantitative growth but on qualitativegrowth that pays equal heed to planetary boundaries and social needs. The social objective is tocombine entrepreneurial freedom and effectivecompetition with social rebalancing and socialsecurity. That is the ideal of the social marketeconomy. With the principles of social marketeconomics, such as fair competition, corporateresponsibility, partnership between managementand labour, codetermination and fair distributionof the fruits of economic activity, the foundationsare laid for our continuing growth, prosperity andemployment. The environmental objective is todecouple the link between economic growth onthe one hand and resource consumption andharmful emissions on the other and so achieve aresource-saving and climate-neutral economy.To make this happen, the German Governmentsees the need for an alliance of society, businessand government for climate neutrality andprosperity and regards the European Green Deal asa unique opportunity to advance climate actionand sustainability with and within the economy.Accordingly, the goal of economic policy is tostrengthen the forces for growth while remainingfocused on the social and environmental objectives.//By means of sound fiscal policies Germanysteadily reduced the government debt ratio in theyears preceding the pandemic. At the same time,by putting federal investments on a permanentfooting and creating incentives for private-sectorinvestment, the German Government has beenreinforcing Germany’s macroeconomic foundations, thereby ensuring that future generationswill inherit a functioning society. Economic andfiscal policy is used to establish investment-friendly incentives and legislative conditions with a view to encouraging business in its pursuit of sustainability, fostering innovation and start-ups, andpaving the way for new business models. Cementing the realignment of the real economy in favourof sustainability will require a greater focus onsustainability in the financial sector. A decisive stepin that direction was the German Government’sadoption of its Sustainable Finance Strategy.Alongside its aim of mobilising urgently neededinvestment for climate action and sustainability,the strategy addresses the increasing climate risksfacing the financial system in order to enhancethe stability of the financial markets.//Germany is working to embed corporate responsibility and sustainability in global value and supplychains more firmly at the global level. As part of asmart mix of binding and voluntary measures asrecommended by the UN Guiding Principles onBusiness and Human Rights, one focus of Germany’s international cooperation is on supportingrelevant multi-stakeholder partnerships, initiatives, and sustainability standards and labels.//In the context of SDG 8 and its cross-linkages toother SDGs, the German Government is active inseveral areas: sustainable economic activity, thedigital transformation, the public budget, financialmarkets, social responsibility (decent work),ensuring and expanding the supply of skilledlabour, and corporate responsibility – sustainablesupply chains. The following are examples of keyactivities which the German Government hasundertaken since 2016 to transition to a sustainable economy.//The Industrie 4.0 platform has been established,uniting some 350 interest groups from business,associations, academic and research institutions, trade unions and politics and takingsovereignty, interoperability and sustainabilityas key guiding principles and areas for actionfor the digital ecosystems of the future.//A programme on the future of value creationfocuses on researching, developing and applying technologies and innovations forhigh-quality manufacturing, services and work.It is laying the groundwork for sustainable andfuture-proof value creation in Germany andEurope. //Establishing the Mittelstand 4.0 programme:The SMEs Digital network and 26 Mittelstand4.0 Centres of Excellence inform and advisesmall and medium-sized enterprises about theopportunities and challenges of the digitaltransition and provide them with supportthrough, for example, demonstration centresand implementation projects. The eStandardsMittelstand 4.0 Centre of Excellence analysessuch matters as potential changes to theenvironment, to social conditions and to thelonger-term economic stability of a businessthat may result from digitised processes alongthe whole value chain.//Transforming the economy with the objective ofclimate neutrality and a switch to renewableenergy: The Climate Action Programme 2030was adopted (see SDG 13), renewable energyand energy efficiency measures have beencontinuously expanded (see SDG 7), and rawmaterial productivity has been enhanced (seeSDGs 7 and 15).//Strengthening in-house training provision: TheSkills Development Opportunities Act enteredinto force in 2019 followed by the Work ofTomorrow Act (Arbeit-von-morgen-Gesetz) in2020, with increased support for training foremployees whose professional occupations aresubject to technological and structural changeas well as improvements in retraining andqualifications counselling.//Sustainable finance: The German Governmenthas set up an advisory council and establishedstrategic dialogues with financial marketoperators and other interest groups to identifyand better embed sustainability considerationsin the financial sector. The intention is, throughthe creation of favourable conditions andcooperation with voluntary initiatives emanating from the financial sector, to align flows ofprivate and public capital with the SustainableDevelopment Goals. The German Governmentadopted a Sustainable Finance Strategy to thatend in 2021. Federal green bonds have beenissued since 2020, and a sustainability blueprintfor semi-public financial assets has beenadopted.//Continuously expanding the range of fundingmechanisms, including venture capital: Thefocus here is chiefly on SMEs, self-employedprofessionals, prospective entrepreneurs andinnovative start-up businesses, specifically toencourage the development of new products,processes and services.//Implementing the National Action Plan forBusiness and Human Rights (NAP): Adopted in2016, the NAP creates the necessary frameworkfor Germany to put the UN Guiding Principleson Business and Human Rights into practice athome and abroad. It articulates the positionthat all businesses are expected to introduce aprocess of corporate due diligence regardingrespect for human rights all along their supplyand value chains. It also describes the parameters of the state’s protective duty and outlinesthe assistance that the German Governmentoffers for implementing due diligence onhuman rights. It is with that aim in mind thatthe German Bundestag adopted the bill for thenational Corporate Due Diligence in SupplyChains Act in June 2021. The German Government is pressing for corresponding EU legislation. Numerous measures provide support tohelp companies make their supply chains moresustainable overall. Within this context, theGerman Government conducts sectoraldialogues. It has also introduced a centralinformation platform on corporate socialresponsibility (CSR), a National Contact Pointfor the OECD Guidelines for MultinationalEnterprises in the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, and a NAP Help Deskin the Agency for Business and EconomicDevelopment.//Combating human trafficking tied to labourexploitation: Founded in 2015, the federal-Länder working group on human traffickingfor the purpose of labour exploitation developed a joint strategy in 2017 to ensure sustained implementation of the internationalagreements and conventions. It reviewed thestrategy in 2021 to ensure it remained up todate. Also created in 2017 and assured offunding until at least 2022, the national ServiceCentre against Labour Exploitation, ForcedLabour and Human Trafficking run by thecivic-education provider Arbeit und Leben DGB/VHS Berlin-Brandenburg pools and coordinatesactivities across the country.//Germany is the second-largest donor of bilateral Aid for Trade (AfT). Within the framework ofan AfT strategy systematically aligned with theglobal Sustainable Development Goals, itprovides around EUR 4.4 billion a year (2019figures) to enhance trading capacity in partnercountries in the Global South and advance theirintegration into regional and global tradesystems.//G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion:With Germany’s support, the GPFI activelycontributes to opening up improved access toadequate financial services, especially forpoorer sections of society and for micro-enterprises and small businesses.//UN Global Compact: Germany supports theworld’s largest corporate responsibility initiative and its German chapter. The GlobalCompact Network Germany has more than 700signatories and as part of the implementationof the 2030 Agenda it chiefly works on areas likebusiness and human rights, the climate and theenvironment, anti-corruption, and sustainability reporting.//The German Government supports variousmulti-stakeholder partnerships linking thespheres of politics, business and civil society topromote sustainability in global supply chains,including the Forum for Sustainable Palm Oil,the German Initiative on Sustainable Cocoa andthe Sustainable Agricultural Supply ChainInitiative. With its currently 138 membersrepresenting businesses, NGOs, trade unionsand standards organisations, the Partnership forSustainable Textiles is a multi-stakeholderpartnership founded in 2014 that helps improve conditions in textiles manufacturingworldwide as well as the social, environmentaland economic standards in producer countries.//Alliance 8.7: By assuming greater responsibilitywithin Alliance 8.7, the German Government isredoubling its efforts to achieve the SDGs inorder to end child labour by 2025 and eradicateforced labour and human trafficking by 2030.//Through the government-run Green Buttoncertification label for sustainable textiles(“Grüner Knopf”) launched in 2019, highenvironmental and social standards are assuredand promoted throughout the global value andsupply chains of textile products. Currently (asof May 2021), some 65 businesses have successfully passed the audit required for certification,and another 120 are in the process of beingaudited. There were already around 90 milliontextile products certified under the GreenButton scheme sold in 2020. The Green Buttonlabel has also been protected under trademarklaw throughout Europe. //• Within the framework of the Special Initiativeon Training and Job Creation, the GermanGovernment is contributing, in cooperationwith the private sector, to the creation of100,000 decent jobs and the improvement ofworking conditions in eight partner countries.//New technologies need to be comprehensivelybrought to market and support for theirdevelopment has to be made more permanenton the basis of the relevant strategies that havealready been drawn up, especially in the fieldsof the bioeconomy, lightweighting and greenhydrogen.Implementation of the High-Tech Strategy 2025:The mission of creating sustainable circulareconomies involves shaping the transition fromthe traditional linear economy to a resource-efficient, greener circular economy.Once the bill for Germany’s Corporate DueDiligence in Supply Chains Act has been passed,the German Government will support businesses in implementing the new law and press forcorresponding EU legislation.Consolidation of sustainability-orientedplatforms for associations: One such platformthat is well worth a mention is the EnterpriseBiological Diversity 2020 (Unternehmen Biologische Vielfalt 2020) platform.On several requirements for the acceleratedpursuit of targets, there is now greater urgency asa result of the COVID 19 pandemic.to continue expanding multi-stakeholderpartnerships (see also SDGs 1, 2, 12 and 17) toboost joint efforts in favour of sustainabilityand corporate responsibility.to combine the economic recovery in partnercountries with support for the developmentand expansion of fair trade relations andsustainable supply chains, as the maintenanceof sustainability standards and due diligencehelps businesses meet quality and sustainabilityspecifications worldwide, reduces risk in supplychains, and improves local working and livingconditions in the partner countries.to propagate the model of partnership betweenmanagement and trade unions in more partnercountries in collaboration with the International Labour Organization (ILO), with a view topaving the way to decent working conditionsaround the world and creating jobs.// The sustainability of the three closely interlinked elements of SDG 9 – infrastructure,industrialisation and innovation – serves as an important foundation for, for example, SDGs2, 8, 11 and 12. In the pursuit of resilient infrastructure both nationally and internationally,the requirements of health, noise and air-quality control, climate change and adaptation,and protection of natural resources have to be taken into consideration when infrastructure is still in the planning stages. So does the need to ensure locally accessible services ofgeneral interest and other provision as well as equal rights to participate in society andeconomic life. In addition, it is important to support innovation, improve scientific researchand technological capabilities, and steadily increase the relevant public and privatespending.//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 9 is covered by two indicators: private andpublic spending on research and development, inpercent of GDP annually, and expansion ofbroadband availability.The German Government has set itself the target,together with the Länder governments and theprivate sector, of spending at least 3.5% of grossdomestic product on research and development(R&D) by 2025. R&D expenditure has been risingcontinuously since 2007. The latest figures have itat 3.18% in 2019. //The way sustainable infrastructure is designedplays a key role in the processes of transformationrequired in such sectors as transport and energy.Germany needs mobile communications infrastructure that sustainably supports the digitaltransition in the economic and social spheres andmakes Germany more attractive to business. Tostrengthen the competitiveness of industrialenterprises in Germany, the German Government’s industrial policy is stimulating, sustainableand guided by the long view. Industrial production needs to be made cleaner and more resourceefficient. This is happening in the context ofstructural change caused by automation anddigitalisation, climate change and other countries’protectionist economic and trade policy. Germanyhas a tremendous amount of innovation toundertake. A productive and independent academic system, a culture of openness to innovation,and the effective sharing of knowledge and ideasin the economic and social arenas are thereforekey objectives for the German Government. //The Federal Transport Infrastructure Plan (FTIP)2030 comprises the projects for investment inGermany’s federal road, rail and waterwaynetwork up to 2030. It is guided by the principlethat maintenance has priority over upgradingand new construction. FTIP 2030 is the firstFederal Transport Infrastructure Plan to havebeen drafted and developed in collaborationwith the public. Beyond FTIP 2030, there is alsofunding for infrastructure for public transportand cycling as well as multimodal transport.//In the interests of establishing full gigabit-capable broadband coverage throughout Germany by2025, the existing support scheme for broadband, which applies to “white areas” (i.e. areaswith data speeds below 30 Mbps), was amendedto pursue the objective of gigabit speeds. On thebasis of a new funding programme, regionswith speeds below 100 Mbps will be eligible forsupport. 2018 saw the establishment of thespecial fund for digital infrastructure.//Implementing the Mobile CommunicationsStrategy agreed in 2019 is intended to swiftlyensure nationwide provision of mobile telephony and data services (LTE/4G), which theadditional roll-out of 5G can build on – in ruralas well as populous areas.//The German Government’s High-Tech Strategytakes the objective of strengthening Germany’sstanding in global competition, poolingresources more effectively and creating freshstimulus for innovation in business and society.//The Research for Sustainable Development –FONA³ framework programme is building thefoundations for forward-looking decision-making and supplying innovative solutions for asustainable society.//One focus of the German Government’s newresearch and innovation framework programme for 2021–2024, entitled Microelectronics. Trustworthy and Sustainable. For Germanyand Europe, is on research and development forsustainable, climate-friendly and energy-efficient electronics in important applications.//The initiative Green ICT (Grüne IKT) is reinforcing support for the development of technological solutions to reduce energy consumptionand CO2 emissions in information and dataprocessing, storage and transmission. It is partof the German Government’s Climate ActionProgramme 2030.//Research policy is focused on making digitaltechnologies sustainable and using them toachieve the SDGs. The Digital Policy Agenda forthe Environment embeds protection of theenvironment, climate and natural world inpolicy on digital affairs.//The National Bioeconomy Strategy fosters thetransition to a sustainable, more resource-efficient and bio-based economy founded onnatural material cycles.//Germany supports sustainable infrastructureinvestment as a shareholder of multilateraldevelopment banks, in international forumssuch as the G7 and G20, and with its ownfinancing. //Germany has been actively involved in theInfrastructure, Cities and Local Action (ICLA)track in the UNFCCC and has launched twoinitiatives: Action towards Climate-friendlyTransport (ACT) and Leadership for UrbanClimate Investment (LUCI). Between 2016 and2021, around EUR 2.8 billion were madeavailable for sustainable urban transportthrough the Transformative Urban MobilityInitiative (TUMI).//In partnership with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO),Germany supports sustainable industrialisationin partner countries. This means, among otherthings, developing industrial-policy expertise invarious countries of Southern Africa andsupporting sustainable industrial parks in suchcountries as Ethiopia and Egypt. //During the COVID 19 pandemic, city administrations are receiving support and training forthe move to digital tools and formats within theframework of the C40 Cities Finance Facility(CFF).//The German Government promotes the study,development and application of key technologies such as artificial intelligence, microelectronics, and communications, quantum andbattery technology, as well as the creation androll-out of infrastructure and training for therequired specialists. In so doing, it helpsstrengthen the technological sovereignty ofGermany and Europe. That sovereignty is animportant prerequisite for achieving the SDGs.More than EUR 6 billion will go to the abovenamed areas as part of the economic stimuluspackage.//With the innovation pact for climate action, theGerman Government is seeking, in collaboration with the industrial and academic sectors,to put into practice further ideas for reducinggreenhouse gases in industry. It will alsoestablish a national action plan for eco-innovation to buttress the EU’s Eco-Innovation ActionPlan at the domestic level.//Germany supports the development andpropagation of different ideas for creating androlling out sustainable infrastructure in developing and newly industrialised countriesthrough, for example, the Cities ClimateFinance Leadership Alliance (CCFLA), the C40Cities Finance Facility (CFF) and the CitiesDevelopment Initiative for Asia (CDIA).//Within the 2030 Agenda, SDG 10 addresses inequality both within and among countries.The equal inclusion of all people is an obligation imposed by human rights as well as bysocial responsibility. SDG 10 is taken to mean equal opportunities and freedom fromdiscrimination, aiming to enable everybody to participate properly in our economic progress and social achievements. Equivalent living conditions relate primarily to comparableprospects of development and opportunities for participation in the different parts ofGermany, and they are one of the German Government’s key objectives.//Worldwide, the top 1% of the population have done more than twice as well from economicdevelopment since 1980 than the poorest 50%. To make matters worse, many direct andindirect ramifications of the COVID 19 pandemic are affecting disadvantaged groups particularly badly. This is exacerbating existing inequalities within and between countries.//In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 10 is covered by two indicators in twocategories.Equal educational opportunities: Foreignschool graduates.Distributive justice: Gini coefficient after socialtransfers.//The latter indicator describes a statistical measureof distributive inequality, mapping the distribution of equivalised disposable income and assetsper capita.//Inequality in income and wealth distribution is agenerally accepted feature of a dynamic marketeconomy. However, the income and wealth gapmust remain moderate, and social inclusion mustbe guaranteed for all. Otherwise, it has the potential to offend people’s sense of justice and jeopardise social cohesion.//In Germany, income inequality rose from 1999 to2005 but has remained largely stable since then.After tax and social transfer payments, incomeinequality in Germany is close to the EU average.In contrast, wealth is far less equally spread thanincome in Germany. There has also been hardlyany change over time, with wealth inequalityremaining stubbornly at a relatively high level.//The German Government produces a report onpoverty and wealth once every legislative term.1Alongside a comprehensive analysis of inequalityin Germany, the report contains its own set ofindicators. //In Germany, income inequality is mitigated bytaxes and transfer payments. At 0.297, the Ginicoefficient for equivalised disposable income isclearly below that for equivalised income beforesocial benefits (0.352). High levels of employment,low unemployment, strong representation for bothlabour and management, and a functioning systemof employee involvement at management levelserve to further combat inequality. As new challenges present themselves, however, questionsarise about the future of work (e.g. the digitaltransition) and the welfare state. Germany has tosafeguard future cohesion and heal existing andemerging divisions.//Inequality also has a regional dimension. That iswhy the German Government is signposting thedismantling of existing regional disparities byimplementing the structural measures agreed inthe course of the Commission on EquivalentLiving Conditions. For the newly establishedpan-German funding system for structurally weakregions, funding programmes previously limitedto eastern Germany have been extended to alldisadvantaged areas. Programmes availablenationwide offer particularly favourable fundingconditions. The subject matter of these programmes includes economic stimulus, researchand innovation, decentralisation of public institutions, the skills base, broadband and digitalisationas well as infrastructure and public services.//Support for structures fostering civic engagementby the general public and civil society is intendedto strengthen social cohesion and democraticawareness as well as to help improve quality of lifeat the local level.//Germany sees the reduction of inequality worldwide as a vital precondition for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It therefore contributesto reducing inequality both nationally and aroundthe world.//Adopted in 2017, the Transparency in WageStructures Act improves the legal frameworkfor comprehensively making pay equalitybetween the genders a reality. //The general statutory minimum wage introduced in 2015 is evolving further, rising to EUR9.50 on 1 January 2021 and thereafter increasing incrementally to EUR 10.45 by 1 July 2022. //The Federal Participation Act (Bundesteilhabegesetz) adopted in 2016 contributes to equality inliving standards for people with disabilities. //The 12 priority measures agreed by the FederalCabinet in July 2019 set the course for theconvergence of living conditions in the 2020s.//As part of the suite of programmes for innovation and structural transformation, strategicalliances are formed connecting businesses,academics and other stakeholders in disadvantaged regions. They receive support to make useof and develop the potential that exists forinnovation in pursuit of sustainable structuraltransformation.//The German Government is committed tofostering inclusive societies and protecting therights of people with disabilities. The aim is foraccessibility and inclusion to allow people withdisabilities to determine their own lives, participate in society and develop their own potential.To pursue this beyond the national level,Germany has ratified the UN Convention onthe Rights of Persons with Disabilities andthereby committed itself to campaigning for itsworldwide implementation.//Germany played an active role in the drafting ofthe 2018 Global Compact for Safe, Orderly andRegular Migration (GCM) and in the 2020regional review process. Germany is the largestcontributor to the GCM implementation fund,providing EUR 7.25 million, and serves on itsSteering Committee. The fund finances projectsin partner countries.//To promote safe, orderly and regular migration,approaches focused on development andpartnership, including consultation for selectedpartner countries’ migration policy, are beingtrialled, established and refined. The GermanGovernment also helps give people betterprospects of remaining in their home countries,not least by providing counselling in Centresfor Jobs, Migration and Reintegration in 12countries.//The Skilled Immigration Act (Fachkräfteeinwanderungsgesetz), which entered into force inMarch 2020, plays a pivotal role in fosteringsafe, orderly and regular migration in that it hasexpanded the ways in which people, especiallythe vocationally qualified, can immigrate.Germany moreover supports partner countriesin making use of the possibilities the Act offerswith regard, for example, to vocational training,time in Germany for trainees and qualifiedprofessionals, and capacity building for partnerinstitutions.//Addis Tax Initiative: Germany is activelyassisting the implementation of this multilateral initiative with the aim of doubling partnercountries’ domestic revenue compared to 2015.//Combating illicit financial flows: As part of itsdevelopment cooperation, Germany supportspartner countries primarily in Africa, theWestern Balkans and Latin America with,chiefly, prevention, financial investigation andasset recovery. It remains an important priorityof Germany’s Presidency of the FinancialAction Task Force (FATF) to strengthen andsupport FATF-style Regional Bodies (FSRBs).//Promoting sustainable, socially responsible andinequality-reducing tax systems: Germanysupports 30 partner countries in making theirsystems of taxation fair and their managementof state revenue and expenditure sustainable.//• The strategy for the inclusion of people withdisabilities in German development cooperationwas adopted in 2019. This contributes to theimplementation of the 2030 Agenda principleof leaving no one behind.//Reducing existing inequalities and avoiding newinequalities caused by the COVID 19 pandemicin Germany and around the world.Safeguarding the maintenance of social servicesin Germany and across the globe in order toprevent social hardship and crisis situations.Creating and safeguarding jobs in the digitaltransition: This includes developing specificrecommendations for political action toimplement the findings of the New Work –New Security dialogue with the objective offiguring out how to ensure future-proof,appropriately remunerated work in safe,regular jobs, better guard against risks toearnings, and qualify people for work in thedigital age.Reforming the global financial marketsThisincludes not only, for example, the implementation of regulatory and fiscal reforms, but alsoincentives to guide private financial investmenttowards greater sustainability. It is also crucialto accommodate the right of countries in theGlobal South to help shape policy with a viewto ensuring sustainable governance of thefinancial markets.3 See the various high-level UN financing for development (FFD) formats, some of them involving the participation of heads of state andgovernment.Orienting the support strategies of multilateraland regional financial institutions towardsreducing inequalities: Development banks likethe World Bank Group should more systematically direct their substantial investmentstowards a socially just economic transition.They should also intensify their path-findinganalysis activities in that area and sharerelevant expertise and experience with otherpublic and private financial market operators. Ensuring equal access to land (land rights):There is a growing need to support partnercountries in implementing the VoluntaryGuidelines on the Responsible Governance ofTenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests formulated by the Food and Agriculture Organization ofthe United Nations (FAO) so that all sections ofa population, particularly marginalised andindigenous groups, can have equal access andhave their rights to that effect protected.Systematically promoting universal access tobasic services: As a result of the COVID 19pandemic, there is an increasing need inpartner countries to ensure fair access to basicservices, chiefly in the areas of healthcare,education, food, water, sanitation, socialsecurity and digital technology.//SDG 11 underlines the value of sustainable urban development policy focused on the longterm and highlights the significance of increasing urbanisation. Currently, the key tasks forintegrated urban development chiefly include encouraging social participation, modifyingbuildings, neighbourhoods and urban infrastructure for resource efficiency, environmentalsustainability and accessibility, and preserving the attractiveness of cities. //The German Sustainable Development Strategyaltogether assigns eight indicators to SDG 11 infour categories.Land consumption Expansion of settlementand transport area, loss of open space anddensity of settlements.Transport Final energy consumption in goodsand passenger transport respectively andaccessibility of large and medium-sized cities.Affordable housing Housing cost overload.Access to cultural heritage Number of objectsin the German Digital Library.// The German Government has committed itself toreducing energy consumption in passengertransport to 80-85% of the 2005 level by 2030.Although the efficiency of energy consumption isrising, i.e. less energy is used per passengerkilometre, this is offset by the growth in passengertransport, so efforts in this area need to be steppedup further. A similar picture emerges for energyconsumption in goods transport. //The aim of SDG 11 is to practise urban development in cities and communities that is focused onthe common good, partnership and resilience andcreates sustainable, effective structures. Allsections of the population do not only have theopportunity to participate, but urban development is to be turned into something that concernseveryone, with projects and programmes developed in collaboration with the public. It is withthis in mind that the Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European Cities drawn up in 2007 has beenrevised to focus particularly on the public interestaspect of urban development. On 30 November2020, the European government ministers responsible for urban development adopted the NewLeipzig Charter subtitled “The transformativepower of cities for the common good”. It serves asa basis for modern urban development in Europeand formulates its remit in terms of the threedimensions of any city: the green city, the just cityand the productive city.//• The existing successful cooperation of theFederal Government, Länder, communities andnational associations of local authorities isbeing continued within the framework of theNational Urban Development Policy launched in2007. The aim is to establish integrated urbandevelopment that addresses economic, environmental and social challenges in cities andcommunities and takes account of international experience.//The German Government supports the Länderand local authorities in their role as sustainability stakeholders through the Municipalities forGlobal Sustainability programme. The programme, for example, promotes the creation oflocal sustainable development strategies,strengthens cross-sectoral cooperation andimproves the management of sustainablemunicipal development. It raises awareness ofthe global responsibility of local players,thereby encouraging local authorities’ engagement with matters of development policy. Insigning a specimen resolution of the Association of German Cities and the Council ofEuropean Municipalities and Regions, around200 local authorities across the country havecommitted themselves to implementing the2030 Agenda. They form a network known asthe Club of 2030 Agenda Municipalities. //Since 2019, model projects and implementationof the Smart City Charter have been supportedwithin the framework of the national SmartCities Dialogue Platform. The City of the FutureInnovation Platform feeds the findings onsustainable urban development into theinternational context.//The City of the Future funding measures of theResearch for Sustainable Development (FONA)Strategy are used, for example, to support thetransition to sustainability in urban areas(urban production, resilience, climate action,quality of life, open and green spaces, etc.) andadvance sustainable urban mobility.//The Urban.Rural.Digital (Stadt.Land.Digital)initiative aims to improve people’s quality oflife, particularly in the fields of education,energy, healthcare, transport and administration, by fostering networks using digitaltechnologies.//The Federal Government supports the Länderand local authorities in meeting bindingquality specifications for sustainable building.The role of timber as a building material is alsobeing strengthened. The aim is to achieveclimate-neutral building stock. The FutureBuilding innovation programme providesimportant stimulus for the sustainable development of building stock.//The Urban Environmental Protection researchpriority focuses on the interplay between urbandevelopment and protection of the environment. //With its urban development assistance, theGerman Government supports cities andcommunities in their sustainable urban development, including action to mitigate and/or adaptto climate change. As in previous years, it madeEUR 790 million available for 2020. Integratedrural development is intended to foster attractive villages with accessible basic services,vibrant centres and the reactivation of vacantbuildings. Strong cultural and creative industries will also help to revitalise cities andcommunities.//Germany sets great store by reaching a common understanding with its partners onsustainable, integrated urban development.The focus is on reciprocal learning, knowledge-sharing and the adaptation of existingproblem-solving ideas. The German Government supports these activities by means of, forexample, networks to foster learning betweenGerman and international local authorities andcity-to-city partnerships for sustainability andclimate action.//Germany also supports climate-friendly andresilient urban development in developing andnewly industrialised countries. One example isthe City Climate Finance Gap Fund, which isfunded by Germany and Luxembourg with atotal of EUR 55 million and implemented bythe World Bank, the European Investment Bankand the Deutsche Gesellschaft für InternationaleZusammenarbeit (GIZ). This was jointly developed with the Global Covenant of Mayors inconnection with the 2019 UN Climate ActionSummit.//In pursuit of the recover better principle,Germany and its partners are committed toincreasing cities’ resilience to external shockswith reconstruction measures and economicstimulus packages and reducing their adverseimpact on the environment by means ofclimate-neutral measures (e.g. for mobility andbuildings). //As part of its international cooperation,Germany is supporting a wide range of sustainable urban development projects with a totalsum exceeding EUR 22 billion. These concentrate on reinforcing the capacity of local,regional and national governance structures tosteer sustainable urban development orpromoting good local governance and civicengagement. Others focus chiefly on localauthority financing, urban mobility, andsustainable urban infrastructure and servicessuch as waste processing and disposal, watersupply and sanitation.//As a member of UN-Habitat, Germany supportsthe creation and dissemination of ways to makeurban development sustainable. City decision-makers are assisted with sustainable,climate-friendly urban development throughinternational networks such as the CitiesAlliance, ICLEI – Local Governments forSustainability, C40 Cities, the Cities ClimateFinance Leadership Alliance (CCFLA) and theClimate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC). Inaddition, the NDC Partnership supportsinterested countries in making their NDCs –their nationally determined contributions tothe Paris Agreement on Climate Change – moreambitious with regard to cities. At the 2019 UNClimate Action Summit, Germany campaignedfor subnational climate finance within theLeadership for Urban Climate Investmentinitiative (LUCI). //Both in Germany and around the world, theGerman Government is actively committed tothe maintenance, protection and conservationof cultural heritage, especially cultural andnatural world heritage sites. It uses the culture-related agreements and programmes ofUNESCO as a platform for promoting andsupporting culture-focused implementation ofthe 2030 Agenda.//As a strategic framework, the New LeipzigCharter turns the spotlight onto the transformative power of cities and communities,focusing on integrated urban developmentapproaches in the face of climate change,demographic developments and the digitaltransition.With a view to further reducing land consumption in Germany, deliberations are under way asto the extent to which the development ofmunicipal spaces should in future be concentrated more on small and medium-sized urbancentres. More support could go to communitieswith around 5,000 inhabitants. In the Europeancontext, where the aim is to achieve circularityin land use – with zero net land consumption –by 2050, more work is needed to reach agreement among the member states on the achievement of targets, given the very broad disparitybetween the different concepts and terms theyuse.An annual EUR 1 billion will be available formeasures to improve communities’ transportoptions between 2021 and 2024, rising to EUR 2billion in 2025. These funds will go primarilytowards infrastructure projects in the realm oflocal passenger rail.The measures of the housing strategy willcontinue to be implemented. Another improvement to housing benefit is the heating costsrelief available to households receiving housingbenefit in the context of carbon pricing, whichis applicable as of 2021. Furthermore, measuresfor the convergence of living conditions aredesigned to ease the migratory pressure onconurbations and encourage use of the existinginfrastructure in rural areas.// The German Sustainable Development Strategyassigns four indicators to SDG 12 in three categories.Sustainable consumption: Market share ofproducts certified by publicly managed sustainability labelling schemes and global environmental damage caused by private householdconsumption.Sustainable production: Use of the EMASenvironmental management scheme inGermany.Sustainable procurement: Sustainable publicprocurement.//The strain placed on the environment around theworld by private household consumption isshown here in terms of domestic and foreignenergy consumption, emissions of CO2 and theuse of raw materials that go into the consumptionof private households in Germany. While the datafor energy consumption and emissions follow afluctuating but generally downward trend, thechange in the use of raw materials is less marked.However, a slight decline of 3% can be observedfor the period from 2010 to 2016. By contrast,energy consumption went down by 6% during thesame period. Between 2010 and 2016, direct CO2emissions fell by 6%, while the emissions footprintof consumer goods fell by 1%. The last five years,on the other hand, show a slight increase inemissions overall rather than a reduction.//Our past consumption behaviour has involvedonly scant consideration of our planet’s limitations. At present, 20% of the global populationconsume 80% of the available raw materials.Industrialised countries have an important role toplay in the global development of sustainableconsumption and production patterns and inefforts to improve resource efficiency. As theireconomies are so firmly integrated in global valueand supply chains, they have a significant impacton production methods in other countries. TheGerman Government’s aim is therefore to furtherdecouple the use of natural resources fromeconomic development, continuously increaseefficiency and keep reducing the consumption ofnatural resources. Germany should be a globalpioneer on the way to a fully circular economy.The German Government is also working tostrengthen sustainable public procurement.Sustainable production focuses throughout theentire value chain on using natural resourcesmore efficiently, avoiding and reducing pollutionincluding greenhouse gas emissions, and preventing the destruction of ecosystems. It emphasisesthe importance of keeping nature intact as well asrespecting human rights, observing labour andsocial standards, and ensuring fair trade.//The National Programme on SustainableConsumption, launched in 2016 and updated inMay 2021, focuses on six areas of consumption:mobility, food, home and household, workplaceand office, clothing, and leisure and tourism.The central point of contact and dialogue onthis is the Centre of Excellence on SustainableConsumption,1 with the National SustainableConsumption Network and a newly createddatabase2 for the implementation of SDG 12 inGermany.//The German Resource Efficiency ProgrammeProgRess III (third iteration published in 2020)is being implemented and updated. //The bill for a Corporate Due Diligence in SupplyChains Act was adopted by the German Bundestag on 11 June 2021, designed to protecthuman rights in global supply chains.//In implementation of the National Action Plan(NAP) for Business and Human Rights, numerous measures assist businesses in adoptingprocesses of corporate due diligence as towhether human rights are upheld throughouttheir supply and value chains and in makingtheir supply chains more sustainable overall(see also SDG 8).//Deforestation-free supply chains: Germany is asignatory of the New York Declaration onForests and the Amsterdam Declarations (seeSDG 15). The Federal Cabinet adopted itsguidelines on promoting deforestation-freesupply chains for agricultural commodities on8 April 2020.//The 2020 National Hydrogen Strategy is gearedtowards building a hydrogen economy.//The German Government’s Raw MaterialsStrategy of 2010 is to be updated.//Within the framework programme to promotematerials research, From Materials to Innovation, the digitalisation of materials research isbeing accelerated in order to map the life cyclesof materials from development and usethrough to recycling.//The Steel Action Concept is a comprehensivepolitical strategy for a steel industry whichis strong, internationally competitive andclimate-neutral on a long-term basis.//The German Waste Prevention Programme,updated in 2021, is being implemented, andwork to foster the circular economy continues.//The National Strategy for Food Waste Reductionhas been put into practice since 2019, and theToo Good for the Bin! Initiative is beingupdated.//The state is leading by example as a consumerwith a variety of measures for sustainableprocurement in the federal administration. Itpromotes sustainable, innovative products andservices and injects the right impetus topromote a sustainable economic recovery.Provisions for this are contained, for example,in the revised Circular Economy Act (Kreislaufwirtschaftsgesetz) and the Federal ClimateChange Act (2019). Further centrally implemented measures include the establishment ofthe Centre of Excellence for SustainableProcurement to provide advice and support topublic contracting authorities, the introductionand implementation of German Governmentguidelines for sustainable textiles procurementby the federal administration, and the amendment of the General Administrative Regulationon the Procurement of Energy-efficientProducts and Services. //An action network for sustainability in cultureand the media assists in the provision ofcorporate-ecology advisory services. Supportalso goes towards the environmentally sustainable production of audiovisual content.//Germany is implementing the Elmau commitments made by the G7 heads of state andgovernment for sustainability in global supplychains. These comprise supporting multi-stakeholder partnerships, strengthening OECDNational Contact Points and promoting themaintenance of social and environmentalstandards throughout global value and supplychains through development cooperation.Advisory and information events are also heldto assist businesses in implementing theOECD-FAO Guidance for Responsible Agricultural Supply Chains.//Germany supports the United Nations OnePlanet network via, for example, the development of global guidance on trustworthyconsumer information. Germany also participates in the UNEP International Resource Paneland supports the Partnership for Action onGreen Economy (PAGE).//Germany established the independent International Sustainable Chemistry CollaborativeCentre (ISC3) in 2017. //In the context of global supply and valuechains, the PREVENT Waste Alliance wasfounded in 2019. The multi-stakeholderpartnership is intended to help ensure thatwaste is minimised across the world, harmfulsubstances are eliminated and resources aremanaged in circular patterns. More than 200member organisations from over 30 countriesjointly campaign for the avoidance, collection,recycling and deployment of secondary rawmaterials in developing and newly industrialised countries. Innovative trial runs arecurrently taking place in 15 countries.//Eco-management/sustainability management:EMAS, the Eco-Management and Audit Scheme,will be adopted at all supreme federal authorities by 2025 in accordance with the GermanGovernment’s Climate Action Programme 2030.Corporate sustainability reporting is beingpromoted on the basis of environmental EMASreporting.In their procurement activities, the federalministries and the contracting authorities ofthe Federal Government, Länder and localauthorities will consistently use the availableflexibility of public procurement law to favoursustainable procurement, and they will examinethe possibility of incorporating minimumstandards of due diligence in respect of humanrights into public procurement procedures.Correspondingly, the German Government willalso advocate for an increase in sustainableprocurement at the EU level.Support also goes to research projects andmeasures on topics including sustainablebusiness and work, the sustainable city of thefuture, sustainable urban mobility, valuingbiodiversity, plastics in the environment,sustainable digital platforms and the dataeconomy, pathways and components of adigital agenda for sustainable consumption,and consumer protection in the service of theUN 2030 Agenda and the SDGs.In 2020, during Germany’s Presidency of theCouncil of the EU, Germany, Portugal andSlovenia produced a paper on “ConsumerProtection in Europe – Lessons Learned fromthe COVID-19 Pandemic”.Germany supports partner countries, e.g. withimplementing internationally recognisedenvironmental and social standards, encouraging sustainable consumption and productionpatterns, establishing circular systems andtransitioning to a green economy. The GO4SDGsinitiative was launched in 2019 with thesupport of Germany by the UNEP, WEF, ITUCand other partners and is geared towardscollaboration with young people and SMEs. It isalso intended to contribute to a green recovery,as is the global Green Forum of the GreenGrowth Knowledge Platform, which waslaunched in 2021 for interactive dialogue onspecialist topics relating to the socio-economictransition.//Increasing global temperatures entail a greater risk of abrupt, irreversible changes in theclimate with the potential for major damage to society, nature and the economy – in Germany as elsewhere. They also increase the potential for conflicts and instability; ongoingclimate change has ever more serious implications for security policy. If we are not toexceed these planetary boundaries, swift and effective measures are called for to reduceclimate-altering emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change. With the GermanStrategy for Adaptation to Climate Change and its associated action plan, the GermanGovernment is pursuing the goal of reducing the vulnerability of natural, social and economic systems to climate impacts and increasing their resilience in respect of climate-related risks. //The German Sustainable Development Strategyassigns two indicators to SDG 13 in the climateaction category: greenhouse gas emissions in CO2equivalents and international climate finance forthe reduction of greenhouse gases and adaptationto climate change. //The German Government’s policy objective ofreducing greenhouse gas emissions in Germany byat least 40% compared with 1990 levels by 2020was achieved. The German Government decidedin May 2021 to cut greenhouse gas emissions by atleast 65% compared with 1990 levels by 2030, by atleast 88% by 2040 and by enough to reach greenhouse gas neutrality by 2045 at the latest. Germany had already achieved its target of raising theamount of international climate finance providedfrom public funds to EUR 4 billion by 2020, doublethe value for 2014, in 2019.//The guiding principle and yardstick of the German Government’s climate policy is the ParisAgreement. When it comes to climate action, theGerman Government relies on a broad toolkitconsisting of legal provisions, economic instruments and support programmes as well as information provision and consulting. The aim of thisis to keep the increase in the global averagetemperature well below 2°C and pursue efforts tolimit that rise to 1.5°C in accordance with the ParisAgreement. Within the EU, the United Nationsclimate negotiations, the G7, G20 and informalforums, the German Government is campaigningfor ambitious international climate policy andappropriate targets for reducing greenhouse gasemissions in order to accelerate the necessarytransition towards decarbonising the globaleconomy and increasing resilience to the consequences of climate change at the internationallevel. In so doing, it is fulfilling its constitutionalmandate under Article 20a of the Basic Law: as theFederal Constitutional Court found in its order of24 March 2021, the Federal Climate Change Act isunconstitutional insofar as it fails to provideadequate specifications for emissions reduction pathways after 2030. It also inferred from Article20a a constitutional climate action mandate withan international dimension, pointing out theessential need for Germany to campaign for globalclimate action in its international negotiations.//The National Climate Initiative to promotebroad climate action in Germany and thesupport programme run as part of the Strategyfor Adaptation to Climate Change will becontinued and amended if necessary to suitevolving needs. //The Battery Research Factory (ForschungsfabrikBatterie) umbrella concept promotes researchand development in Germany for new batterytechnologies – from materials to battery cellsto recycling – which are key technologies fore mobility, for example.//• The federal administration is leading byexample, aiming to become climate-neutral by2030 in accordance with the Federal ClimateChange Act. The Coordination Office for aClimate-neutral Federal Administration was setup to that end in February 2020.//By regularly organising the Petersberg ClimateDialogue, Germany promotes internationaldialogue and cooperation for implementationof the Paris Agreement. It also supports research on climate change and thereby aids thework of the Intergovernmental Panel onClimate Change (IPCC). //Germany is one of the main donors for globalclimate action in international developmentcooperation and supports measures designed tocut greenhouse gas emissions, advance adaptation to climate change, and protect forests andbiodiversity via bilateral and multilateralprogrammes and funds. In total, Germanyprovided around EUR 7.58 billion for international climate finance in 2019. An average of41% (EUR 1.78 billion) of Germany’s climatefinance from public funds in 2019 went towardsadaptation measures. That share is significantlyhigher when it comes to LDCs and small islanddeveloping states (SIDSs), at 57% and 60%respectively. Germany contributes further tointernational climate finance through instruments to leverage capital market funding andmobilise private investments. //• Germany is one of the largest contributors tomultilateral climate funds. These include theGreen Climate Fund (GCF), to which Germanyhas pledged EUR 2.25 million to date, as well asthe Global Environment Facility (GEF), theClimate Investment Funds (CIFs) and theAdaptation Fund. Germany set the GreenRecovery Initiative in motion in collaborationwith the World Bank and has provided it withEUR 20 million to date, seeking to combineeconomic recovery programmes with sustainabledevelopment and particularly climate action.//Through the International Climate Initiative(IKI), Germany has provided EUR 5 billion tosupport developing and newly industrialisedcountries since 2008, funding climate changemitigation, adaptation and biodiversity projectsto support the creation of political, technological, economic and financial market conditionsconducive to sustainable economic systems inpartner countries. The NAMA Facility supportssupplementary sector-specific CO2 reductionactivities as an independent funding body. Inaddition, also within the framework of the IKI,Germany set up a package of measure for agreen recovery in July 2020, worth an initialtotal of EUR 68 million.//The InsuResilience Global Partnership, initiatedduring Germany’s G7 Presidency in 2015, is themain global initiative for the development ofclimate and disaster risk finance and insurance.Germany is its largest contributor, providingEUR 670 million. //Germany is one of the founding members andsupporters of the NDC Partnership, a globalpartnership for the realisation of the nationallydetermined contributions that assists developing and newly industrialised countries indrawing up and realising ambitious NDCs.//The objective of the Nitric Acid Climate ActionGroup (NACAG) is to quickly reduce nitrousoxide emissions and bring about a long-termtransformation of the sector. The globalreduction potential in this sector in the nextten years amounts to well over a gigatonne ofCO2 equivalents.//The Federal Climate Change Act prescribes whatquantity of greenhouse gases each sector ispermitted to emit each year. If a sector exceedsits legally prescribed emission volumes, therelevant ministry must present an immediate-action programme. The Council of Expertson Climate Change supports the GermanGovernment in regularly reviewing the progress made on targets.To create a level playing field for climatefriendly investment across Europe, the GermanGovernment advocates the introduction ofEU-wide carbon pricing for the transport andheating sectors.Under the Climate Action Programme 2030, animportant role in reducing greenhouse gasemissions is to be played by e mobility. Thelithium ion batteries currently required forelectric vehicles have their own carbon footprint. Challenges lie, for example, in the energyintensity involved and the need for sustainablyextracted and processed raw materials. There isalso a need for research into the recycling ofbattery cells so that valuable raw materials canbe brought back into circulation.Germany will continue to pay its fair share intointernational climate finance and keep up itsinvolvement in the future. In this context, it isimportant to agree on an ambitious post-2025climate finance target.//Strong, healthy marine and coastal ecosystems are of paramount importance for global foodsecurity, sustainable economic development, and the adaptation of coastal inhabitants tothe effects of climate change. These ecosystems are crucial to the planet’s ecological equilibrium and, as carbon sinks, help regulate the climate and lower temperatures. //The German Sustainable Development Strategyassigns two indicators to SDG 14 under theheading protecting the oceans – protecting andsustainably using oceans and marine resources:nitrogen inputs via the inflows into the North andBaltic Seas and share of sustainably fished fishstocks in the North and Baltic Seas.In order to counter eutrophication effects such asoxygen depletion and the subsequent loss ofbiodiversity and destruction of fishing grounds,the intention is to reduce nitrogen inputs into theNorth and Baltic Seas. Concentrations of nitrogendisplayed a downward trend in recent years.Overall, however, the management targets are notbeing sustainably and universally fulfilled atpresent. The 2013-2017 average for the North Seainflows was a concentration of 3.0 mg/l (targetvalue: 2.8 mg/l). For rivers flowing into the BalticSea, the average concentration for 2015-2019 was3.2 mg/l (target value: 2.6 mg/l). //The German Government’s goal for futuregenerations is to still find ecologically intact andfunctional coasts and oceans whose resources theyare able to use indefinitely. Germany is alsohelping to ensure that additional coastal andmarine areas in developing and newly industrialised countries are placed under conservationprotection, are managed effectively and sustainably, and are financially secure. //In order to attain a “good environmental status”in accordance with the EU Marine StrategyFramework Directive (MSFD) and a “goodecological status” in accordance with the WaterFramework Directive, a variety of measures arebeing implemented to bring about the necessary significant reduction of nutrient inputsinto the North and Baltic Seas. The 2016revision of the Ordinance on the Protection ofSurface Waters (Oberflächengewässerverordnung) specified quantitative reduction targetsto guide their management.//The Fertiliser Application Ordinance (Düngeverordnung) revised in 2017 and amended again in2020 is intended to reduce inputs of nutrientsgenerated by agricultural fertilisation intoinland waters and seas. Agri-environmental andclimate measures and the Strategy for theFuture of Organic Farming adopted in 2017 arealso making important contributions. //Ensuring the sustainable management of fishstocks is a central concern of the GermanGovernment’s fisheries policy. The reform ofthe 2013 EU Common Fisheries Policy (CFP),stipulating that all stocks are to be maintainedat the level giving the maximum sustainableyield by 2020 at the latest, is being put intopractice by means of multi-species plans for theindividual marine areas. The plan for the BalticSea has been in force since July 2016 and thatfor the North Sea since July 2018. The landingobligation, introduced incrementally to apply toall fishing that is subject to catch restrictions by2019, also serves to improve the way fisheriesresources are used. //Eight further marine protected areas wereplaced under nature conservation and landscape protection in 2017, having been designated in line with the Habitats Directive.//In the EU and the UN, the German Governmentis advocating that an implementing agreementfor the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea beagreed to create the necessary conditions forthe effective protection of marine biodiversityin the high seas, beyond the boundaries ofnational sovereignty//The German Government supports the establishment of protected areas in the Arctic andAntarctic as well as the designation of a highseas marine protected area in the Arctic underthe aegis of the OSPAR Convention for theProtection of the Marine Environment of theNorth-East Atlantic. It has drawn up an EUproposal for the Weddell Sea in the SouthernOcean of Antarctica. //• In the fight against marine litter, the GermanGovernment’s main focus is on avoiding wasteand preventing inputs of debris. Germany iscampaigning intensively on this within theframework of the OSPAR and HELCOMConventions for the Protection of the MarineEnvironment and made marine litter one of thetopics of its G7 and G20 Presidencies in 2015and 2017.//Since 2008, the German Government’s International Climate Initiative has supported projectsfor ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) to thetune of more than EUR 270 million. A focus isplaced on adaptation support in connectionwith mangroves and the protection of coastalhabitats.//The German Government is also fundingmarine projects worth more than EUR 140million. Germany supports the Blue ActionFund and its expansion of marine protectedareas, which have currently reached an area ofalmost 200,000//Germany promotes sustainable fisheries andaquaculture in partner countries and supportsthe fight against illegal, unregulated andunreported fishing.//The German Government supports the European Commission in its efforts for a swift andsuccessful outcome to the WTO negotiationson an agreement to eliminate fisheries subsidies which contribute to illegal, unreported andunregulated (IUU) fishing or to overcapacityand overfishing.//At the end of 2020, none of the EU memberstates with reporting obligations had achieved“good environmental status” as per the MSFDon schedule. The German Government and theLänder are working for more effective implementation of the national environmentaltargets for marine conservation, particularly bymeans of a national MSFD programme ofmeasures to be updated in 2021 and thedrafting of the Water Framework Directive forthe 2021-2027 management period.The German Government will in future domore to ensure that the framework plans forthe improvement of agricultural structures andcoastal protection are consistent with sustainable coastal development and also examinewhether the 2006 Integrated Coastal ZoneManagement Strategy should be updated,possibly with reference to implementation ofthe MSFD.Through a funding programme, Germany issupporting projects in countries on the banksof the ten rivers which cause 90% of the world’sriver-borne plastic waste in the oceans. TheGerman Government is continuing to expandits international cooperation for the reductionof marine litter. //Intact terrestrial ecosystems with a natural variety of species are the foundation required forensuring varied diets. They supply clean air and drinking water and provide important rawmaterials. As carbon sinks, they help to regulate temperatures and protect the climate,provide stronger resilience in the face of environmental disasters, are better placed to adaptto climate change and can prove more resistant to the spread of infectious diseases. //In the German Sustainable Development Strategy,SDG 15 is covered by.an indicator tracking populations of representative bird species in different main habitatsand landscape types in the biodiversity andlandscape quality category.an indicator measuring ecosystems in whichcritical loads for eutrophication due to nitrogeninput are exceeded under the heading protecting ecosystems, conserving ecosystem servicesand preserving habitats and two indicators on the REDD+ rulebook andinternational soil protection depicting thepreservation or restoration of forests underREDD+ (reducing emissions from deforestationand forest degradation) and international soilprotection. //The indicator shows the development of population numbers for 51 selected bird species in theform of an index. Other species besides birds alsorely on landscapes with intact, sustainably usedhabitats, which means that the indicator alsoindirectly reflects the development of many otherspecies in the landscape and the sustainability ofland use. The indicator value stagnated over thelast ten reporting years (2006-2016), reaching70.5% of the target value in 2016 compared with70.2% in 2006. If this trend continues, the goal for2030 will not be achieved. While a negative trendis emerging for farmland, coasts and seas, thetrend for forests, settlements and inland watershas been positive in the last ten years. //As an industrialised country with a high population density, Germany has to strike a balancebetween protecting and using ecosystems. Morethan half the area of Germany is used for agricultural purposes, and a third is woodland. Inpublishing its National Strategy on BiologicalDiversity in 2007, the German Governmentpresented an ambitious national programme forimplementing the Convention on BiologicalDiversity in order to halt and turn the tide on thedecline of biodiversity in Germany. The measuresare aimed not only at governmental stakeholdersbut at all relevant decision-makers. Germany isalso active in numerous multilateral organisations, forums and initiatives, helping to shape theinternational dialogue for forward-looking policyon biodiversity, forests and land.//The National Strategy on Biological Diversityadopted in 2007, which contains roughly 330targets and 430 concrete measures across 16areas for action is to be updated for the post2020 period.The Action Programme for Insect Conservation,adopted in 2019 to turn the tide on the fallingnumbers and diversity of insects, is beingimplemented.// As the key guide for forestry and forest-basedindustries, the 2020 Forest Strategy is beingrecast to incorporate the ethos of biodiversityin a 2050 Forest Strategy.//Published in 2017 as a result of the ClimateAction Plan 2050, the Charter for Wood 2.0 isbeing implemented as a dialogue process onenhancing the contribution of wood fromsustainable forestry to protecting the climate,conserving finite resources and safeguardingvalue creation.// The German Government is implementing theStrategy on Agrobiodiversity, the Strategy forthe Future of Organic Farming adopted in 2017and the National Bioeconomy Strategy adoptedin 2020 as well as to draft an Arable FarmingStrategy and a Bog Protection and Peat Reduction Strategy.//With a view to taking account of the greateconomic value that diverse, intact ecosystemshave for Germany, the German Government isworking on measuring and mapping the healthand performance of ecosystems nationwide aswell as incorporating the value of natural capitalinto the environmental economic accounts atthe Federal Statistical Office.//Adopted in 2019, the City Nature (Stadtnatur)master plan is being implemented to supportlocal authorities in protecting and creatinghigh-quality natural spaces in urban areas, as isthe federal Blue Belt programme for therestoration of 2,800 km of rivers and theiradjacent meadows in subsidiary parts of thefederal waterways network.//In the context of the Convention on BiologicalDiversity (CBD), Germany is advocating anambitious post-2020 global framework forbiodiversity that needs to support the membercountries in better implementing the CBD’sgoals, provide adequate responses to the poorstate of the natural world and address thefactors driving the rapid loss of biodiversity.Germany assists countries in Africa, Oceaniaand Latin America with implementation of theNagoya Protocol of the CBD, the valorisation ofgenetic resources and the creation of valuechains that observe the applicable access andbenefit-sharing (ABS) rules and contribute tothe conservation of biodiversity throughbenefit-sharing.//Germany is a party to the United NationsConvention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) and the Intergovernmental Science PolicyPlatform on Biodiversity and EcosystemServices (IPBES), home to their secretariats, andthe largest contributor of funding to supportthe UNCCD’s implementation (around EUR 545million in 2017 under the Rio marker fordesertification). Since 2013, Germany hasprovided more than EUR 500 million a year forthe conservation of forests and other ecosystems.//The New York Declaration on Forests of 2014aims to end natural-forest loss by 2030 andrestore degraded landscapes throughout theworld. The German Government is supportingthis with the Bonn Challenge platform foraction, whose target has been extended since2011 to encompass the restoration of a total of350 million hectares of destroyed forest by2030. It also supports the African AFR100initiative that has been working since 2015 torestore 100 million hectares of forest landscapein Africa by 2030. In connection with theAmsterdam Declaration signed in 2015, theGerman Government adopted its Guidelines forthe Promotion of Deforestation-Free SupplyChains in Agricultural Commodities in 2020 in order to encourage initiatives on the part ofproducers and consumers and to support auniform and more robust approach at the EUlevel. In tandem with this, the German Government established the Thünen Centre of Competence on the Origin of Timber as well as initiating and financing the Global Timber TrackingNetwork (GTTN). Within the framework of theGTTN, innovative measures have been developed for identifying types and geographical origins of wood. Altogether, the GTTN accommodates experts from over 40 countries.//Combating wildlife crime is a priority of Germany’s environmental and development policy. Itwas at the G20 Summit held in Hamburg in2017, under Germany’s Presidency, that theHigh-Level Principles on Combatting Corruption Related to Illegal Trade in Wildlife andWildlife Products were adopted. //In the context of international cooperation,Germany supports its partners with the establishment and sustainable management ofnatural world heritage sites, national parks,biosphere reserves and nature reserves. In 50partner countries, an overall area larger thanFrance and Germany combined is supportedwith an ongoing funding volume of more thanEUR 1 billion.//Germany has provided more than EUR 1 billionfor reducing emissions from deforestation andforest degradation (REDD+) since 2008. TheInternational Climate Initiative also focuses onlowering emissions and reducing deforestationand destructive forest use. Germany willcontinue to work on these targets together withNorway and the United Kingdom in 2021 andthereafter, beyond the original term of theGermany-Norway-UK (GNU) partnership.//Despite the progress achieved, there is still aloss of habitats and species to be observed inGermany. Achieving the existing targets willtake additional effort, in some cases a significant amount, at the federal, Länder and locallevels in all the relevant policy areas.The number of nature reserves and nationalparks is increasing steadily, and they accountedfor around 4.4% of Germany’s land area as of2016. Areas of national natural heritage are tobe expanded.In the light of new targets set at the EU level in2020 and in the context of the 2021 meeting ofthe UN Convention on Biological Diversity, arevision of the National Strategy on BiologicalDiversity is planned for 2022. In addition, awide variety of steps are being taken for theconservation and sustainable use of natural andcultural landscapes and the protection ofbiodiversity and genetic resources. They includeagri-environmental, climate and conservationmeasures.With regard to soil protection, the GermanGovernment is endeavouring to develop ameaningful soil indicator which covers allrelevant forms of land use and changes in thevarious functions of the soil. The indicatorcannot be incorporated into the GermanSustainable Development Strategy until it isnext updated. Doing so will also help to supportthe pursuit of SDG target 15.3 on land degradation neutrality.//SDG 16 is seen as central to the 2030 Agenda as it describes the mutual dependence ofpeace and security and sustainable development. SDG 16 calls for violence in all its formsto be significantly reduced, mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of conflicts to beestablished and the principles of the rule of law and good governance to be promoted.//The German Sustainable Development Strategyassigns four indicators to SDG 16 across threecategories.The criminal offences indicator comes underthe heading crime.the peace and security category is representedby the number of projects to secure, registerand destroy small arms and light weapons(SALW) carried out by Germany in affectedregions of the world.good governance is measured by theCorruption Perceptions Index in Germany andin partner countries of Germany’s developmentcooperation.//Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) scores reflectthe extent to which a country’s public sector isperceived to be corrupt. The indicators show howthe CPI score has developed both in Germany andin partner countries. The latter is based on thenumber of partner countries in which improvements have been observed.//However, continued and increased efforts will berequired – not least in the area of regulation – toachieve the target of a significant improvement in2030 compared with 2012.//Germany firmly believes that peace and security issymbiotic with sustainable development and thatgood governance and sustainable development aremutually dependent too. This means that, on theone hand, sustainable development is impossiblewithout peace and good governance; on the otherhand, there can be no permanently peacefulsocieties and no chance for people to live a life ofdignity, freedom and self-determination withoutsustainable development. Access to justice for alland public trust in an operational, rules-basedconstitutional state with a functioning separationof powers are crucial to sustainable development,throughout the world and in Germany itself. Thesame applies to effective, accountable and inclusive state institutions and the effective participation of the public in political opinion-forming anddecision-making. //The intention in Germany is to further expand therule of law, simplify access to justice for all andcombat crime and corruption more effectively.One priority of the work in Germany lies increating the conditions for an inclusive society inwhich particularly people with disabilities are ableto gain equal access. This involves targetedmeasures to make accessibility and inclusion areality. The aim is furthermore to establish betterprotection of women, young people and childrenagainst violence and sexual violence. //Around the world, Germany supports and promotes initiatives for crisis prevention, conflictmanagement and peacebuilding, as well as for therule of law and good governance, with a particularfocus on neighbouring regions of the EU and thecountries of the Global South. Implementation ofthe UN Security Council’s Women, Peace andSecurity Agenda is a unifying theme here.//Promoting good governance and creating easier,non-discriminatory access to justice for allcitizens as well as ‘representational’ access tojustice for people and the environment throughnon-governmental organisations.//Introducing a model declaratory action undercivil procedure law: Created in 2018, this formof judicial remedy makes it easier for consumers to have their claims – such as those againstlarge companies – upheld.//Adoption of an Act to Improve Enforcement ofthe Law in Social Networks: The entry into forceof the Act to Improve Enforcement of the Lawin Social Networks (Netzwerkdurchsetzungsgesetz) in 2017 and its revision in 2020 meanthat social networks now have an obligation torun effective complaints systems for illegalcontent.//The Enhanced Criminal Prosecution for MoneyLaundering Act (Gesetz zur Verbesserung derstrafrechtlichen Bekämpfung der Geldwäsche)passed by the Bundestag and Bundesrat in 2021further strengthens the foundations of effectiveand consistent criminal prosecution of peopleinvolved in money laundering.//Adoption of a Sexual Violence against ChildrenAct (Gesetz zur Bekämpfung sexualisierterGewalt gegen Kinder): New criminal offenceswere defined, and the associated penaltiesincreased with the entry into force of this lawin 2021.//With the Competition Register Act (Wettbewerbsregistergesetz) of 2017, the GermanGovernment sent an important message aboutfighting economic crime, especially corruptionand bribery in the context of public procurement. The Competition Register, currentlybeing set up, is to be a modern digital registerwhich public contracting authorities can accesseasily and swiftly. They can use the register toreliably obtain information about thoseoffences which must result in exclusion frompublic procurement – chiefly bribery, humantrafficking, formation of criminal organisations,financing of terrorism, money laundering,withholding of social-security contributionsand tax evasion.//The 2021-2022 German Government Action Planfor Human Rights prioritises, among otherthings, the inclusion of women in crisis prevention, peace processes and post-crisis rehabilitation as part of the Women, Peace and SecurityAgenda, advancement of the rule of law,especially for the prevention and resolution ofconflicts, and an end to impunity. The tools ofdevelopment cooperation are to be deployed inpursuit of these objectives. The implementationreport on the Action Plan on Women, Peaceand Security for 2017-2020 provides information about almost 700 activities implementedby the German Government in the past fouryears.//The German Government campaigns throughout the world for the implementation of the UNConvention on the Rights of the Child and itsthree optional protocols.//The inclusive involvement of young people iscrucial to democratic and just societies. TheGerman Government champions the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security,particularly the protection of young peaceactivists and the promotion of youth-ledorganisations in countries afflicted by orvulnerable to conflict. Resolution 2535 was consequently adopted under Germany’s SecurityCouncil Presidency in 2020, underscoring theYouth, Peace and Security Agenda and emphasising the role that young peace activists haveto play.//• The German Government adopted threerelevant interministerial strategies in 2019 onthe basis of its voluntary commitments underthe policy guidelines Preventing Crises, Managing Conflicts, Building Peace: one for promotingthe rule of law, one to support security sectorreform – i.e. to reform the security services suchas the armed forces and police under democratic oversight – and one on dealing with the pastand reconciliation (transitional justice) afterwars and violent conflict. In 2021 the GermanGovernment published a report illustrating thesuccessful implementation of the above policyguidelines and describing existing challenges aswell as the priorities for the years to come.//Through the Civil Peace Service, the GermanGovernment seconds peace experts to NGOs inpartner countries to support them in promoting non-violent ways of dealing with conflictsand potential sources of conflict. Germany willactively maintain that commitment.//As its second-largest financial contributor,Germany advocates further strengthening theInternational Criminal Court (ICC) as the centralinstitution in the global struggle againstimpunity for major crimes that affect theinternational community as a whole. Thisincludes supporting the ongoing review andreform process to improve the ICC’s operationsand enhance the effectiveness of its procedures. //Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) control:Germany is among the world’s leading contributors to projects relating to the control of smallarms and light weapons. Altogether, theGerman Government provided EUR 19 millionin Federal Foreign Office funds in 2020 tosupport projects throughout the world. Thesuccessful model for combating the SALWproblem in the Western Balkans in a holisticand regionally integrated manner, which wasdeveloped in 2018 under Franco-Germanmediation, has served as a model for otheraffected regions such as the Caribbean and WestAfrica.//G20 initiative to prevent and fight corruption:During its Presidency of the G20 in 2017,Germany pressed for the adoption of High-Level Principles to advance the cause of integrity inthe public and private sectors. //• Open Government Partnership (OGP): Withinthe framework of this alliance of 78 states,Germany is pushing for greater transparency,civic engagement, action against corruption anduse of new technologies. In the context of theongoing implementation of the Second NationalAction Plan (2019-2021) of the Open Government Partnership (OGP), Germany is helping toadvance measures for transparency, inclusion,cohesion and digitalisation in developmentcooperation and foreign affairs as well as youthparticipation and better regulation.//Good governance and the rule of law: Germanyhas increased its support in this area for partnercountries in the Global South from around EUR730 million in 2016 to over EUR 900 million in2020. //Strengthening of civil society: Germany hascontinuously increased its support of programmes for civil society (from EUR 890million in 2016 to more than EUR 1.2 billionin 2020).//Increased measures to prevent and fightcorruption: Germany will continue to pressahead with appropriate measures worldwideand within Germany, particularly to makegovernment and parliamentary decisions moretransparent. This includes the introduction of alobby register.Enhanced efforts to combat sexual violenceagainst children and adolescents: After theNational Council to Combat Sexual Violenceagainst Children and Adolescents was puttogether in 2019, targets and implementationmeasures for prevention and intervention areto be drawn up by summer 2021 and subsequently put into practice.The National Action Plan on Women, Peace andSecurity (2021-24) sets out the German Government’s strategy for the next four years. Theemphasis is on taking action in the four areasinclusion of women in crisis prevention,peace processes, post-crisis rehabilitation, andprotection against sexual and gender-basedviolence – as well as strengthening the Women,Peace and Security Agenda and anchoring it inthe institutions of the German Government.In launching an LGBTI Inclusion Strategy in2021 to guide its foreign policy and development cooperation, the German Government israising the visibility of its commitment to therealisation of equal rights for LGBTI people andits condemnation of discrimination on thegrounds of sexual orientation or genderidentity and characteristics, thereby contributing to better inclusion alongside other committed donors. As part of the strategy, the GermanGovernment is promoting the collection ofaggregated and anonymised data on the humanrights situation of LGBTI people to bringexisting inequalities into the light, improvesupport for LGBTI people and their representatives, and tailor it to their specific needs.LGBTI refers to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people.Increasing efforts to strengthen human rights:Through its 2020-2022 membership of the UNHuman Rights Council, Germany is continuingto campaign for the ongoing development ofinternational human rights instruments. Strengthening the substantive provisions ofinternational criminal law: On the basis of thepreliminary work undertaken by the UnitedNations International Law Commission (ILC),Germany is working together with its partnerson an international convention on crimesagainst humanity.Increased control and tracing of small arms,light weapons and weapon systems: In cooperation with international partners such as theUnited Nations, Germany will continue itscommitment to combating proliferation,strengthening control and tracing systems(such as post-shipment controls), creatingregional capacities across the world and furtherdeveloping measurable benchmarks andindicators.Strengthening international processes toenhance regulation of the international armstrade: Germany supports the implementationand further universalisation of the Arms TradeTreaty under the patronage of the UnitedNations, this being the only instrument establishing globally applicable, legally bindingminimum standards for arms exports.//The 2030 Agenda is underpinned by a global partnership that transcends the old donor-recipient mentality, ascribes joint responsibility to all countries of the Global North and GlobalSouth and actively involves non-governmental stakeholders as well. It is only throughmutual respect, shared values and the combined efforts of all stakeholders that the objectives of the 2030 Agenda can be achieved. Implementation of the 2030 Agenda calls for anew partnership model upheld by the following key principles.Universality of goals – all must act.Shared responsibility – commensurate contributions from each player.Effectiveness, transparency and monitoring – mutual motivation.Multi-stakeholder approach – all are part of the team.//The German Sustainable Development Strategyassigns three indicators to SDG 17 in threecategories.Development cooperation: Official development assistance as a proportion of grossnational income.Knowledge transfer, especially in technicalareas: The share of students and researchersfrom developing countries per year.Opening markets: Imports from least developed countries (LDCs).The trends depicted below are given as exampleson the basis of the first-mentioned indicator.//Germany has committed itself to the target set bythe UN of raising its ODA expenditure to 0.7% ofits gross national income (GNI) and aims to achievethis by 2030. Germany already reached this targetback in 2016, not least due to a significant increasein domestic expenditure for refugees at that time.Since then, Germany’s ODA/GNI ratio not counting domestic refugee costs has been moving in anupward direction towards the target value. Inabsolute terms, German ODA in 2020 amounted toaround EUR 25 billion, putting the current ratio at0.73% according to provisional OECD data.Germany is thus the world’s second-largestbilateral donor and is expected to have reached the0.7% target for the second time in 2020. //Germany is committed to continuously enhancingpolicy coherence for sustainable development andmaking greater efforts to align all policy areaseven more consistently with the 17 SDGs. Thefocus is threefold.contributing actively and innovatively to thefinancing of global sustainable development.promoting technological cooperation, particularly in respect of environmentally sound andpro-development technologies.guaranteeing the inclusive, participatoryinvolvement of civil society.//The update of the German Sustainable Development Strategy is an exemplary illustration of thepartnership with civil society in Germany (see alsoChapter 1.2 above).//Trade policy, which is shaped by the EuropeanUnion, also makes a substantial contribution tosustainable development. The German Government is therefore continuing to support theEuropean Commission in appropriately enshrining sustainability elements in free trade agreements and the generalised scheme of tariffpreferences. In addition, the EU promotes theachievement of the SDGs in the work of the WorldTrade Organization, another area in which theGerman Government contributes constructively. //Germany campaigns for the conditions for newpartnership models to be created not only at homeand in Europe but also in its partner countries.Important stimulus for implementation of the2030 Agenda can come from the private sector aslong as companies align their business modelsmore strongly with the guiding principle ofsustainable development. Significant contributions in this respect can come both from suitableincentive schemes and from models of cooperationbetween management and labour. Germany seeskey catalysts for implementation of the 2030Agenda in strengthening the private sector,promoting collaborations between the publicsector, private sector, trade unions, civil society andthe academic community, and fostering NorthSouth, South-South and triangular cooperation.New types of cooperation are therefore being triedout, multi-stakeholder partnerships in collaboration with the private sector encouraged andinnovative funding options provided within thescope of Germany’s international developmentcooperation, with a view to achieving higher levelsof sustainable private investment with an employment impact (creation of decent and skilled jobs)in the countries of the Global South. Throughthese efforts, Germany is strengthening holisticmeans of implementing the 2030 Agenda andpursuing all 17 SDGs within the framework of theAddis Ababa Action Agenda on financing forsustainable development.//As a sign of increased cooperation with theGerman private sector with regard to countriesof the Global South, export credit and investment guarantees are issued that safeguard jobsin Germany and enable newly industrialisedand developing countries to access moderntechnologies. Export initiatives and a managerialtraining programme support SMEs from Germany in tapping markets in developing and newlyindustrialised countries, particularly in greentechnologies, healthcare and energy. Development partnerships with business are institutedto get German and European companiesinvolved in development cooperation, e.g. viaPPPs or components of the developmentinvestment fund established in 2019. The fundsfor the aforementioned development partnerships were increased by 87%, from EUR 125million in 2016 to EUR 234 million in 2020.//Enhanced processes of dialogue between theGerman Government and civil society on the2030 Agenda (including the 2030 AgendaDialogue Forum, the #17Ziele (17 goals) campaign and the information campaign Tour derNachhaltigkeit on sustainable development).//Germany has met its voluntary commitmentand continuously increased the share of itsimports that come from least developedcountries, reaching a value of EUR 10.4 billion(0.94%) in 2019. This is up from a share of totalimports to Germany of around 0.8% in 2016. //Alliance for Multilateralism: Germany foundedthis alliance together with its partners tobolster multilateral approaches grounded in aspirit of partnership, advance concrete initiatives, stabilise the rules-based internationalorder, uphold its principles and, where necessary, amend them to face new challenges.//G20/OECD Action Plan on Base Erosion andProfit Shifting: Together with other EU memberstates, Germany has committed itself toimplementing the Action Plan on Base Erosionand Profit Shifting (BEPS).//G20 Compact with Africa initiative – reformfinance: Germany has strongly pressed forAfrican countries focused on reform to be giventargeted support and to this end makes publicfunds available for particularly reform-focusedcountries in Africa. So far, Ethiopia, Côted’Ivoire, Ghana, Morocco and Tunisia havebenefited from the initiative.//Continuous involvement in the WTO Aid forTrade initiative: Created in 2005, the initiativeaims to increase developing countries’ tradingcapacity. By consistently focusing its Aid forTrade strategy on the global SDGs (see alsoSDG 8), Germany has assumed a leading role. Itschief funding priorities lie in social, labour andenvironmental standards, trade facilitation,reduction of trade barriers and the promotionof quality-control infrastructure. The GermanGovernment plays an active role in the GermanAlliance for Trade Facilitation and the GlobalAlliance for Trade Facilitation, two multi-stakeholder partnerships.//Germany has expanded promotion of theprivate sector – particularly with regard toenvironmentally and socially sustainable,inclusive business models – and measuresfostering the development of financial marketsand systems through the creation of incentivesfor private sector investors (including guarantees, structured funds, PPPs, microfinanceinstitutions, digital financial services andinsurance instruments for climate risks).//North-South, South-South and triangularcooperation: By means of these innovativecooperation formats, Germany supports bothtechnological cooperation and the development of capacities and expertise in countries ofthe Global South.//The German Government set up a comprehensive Emergency COVID-19 Support Programmeas part of its development cooperation as earlyas April 2020 and reallocated EUR 1.63 billionfrom the current budget for the immediatecrisis response. In 2020 and 2021, a total of EUR4.7 billion is being made available as part of theprogramme. This included targeted financialsupport for international initiatives such as theCOVID Emergency Response Window of theWomen’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund (EUR3.5 million in total). Furthermore, the GermanGovernment made available additional funds ofEUR 450 million in 2020 for humanitarianmeasures to combat the COVID 19 pandemic.//Boosting the development impact of migrantworkers’ private remittances: Germany supportsthe sustainable use and the secure, swift andcost-effective transfer of remittances sent homeby migrant workers, providing projects on thedigital transition and financial literacy as wellas financial subsidies for remittances to micro-enterprises in African countries.//Continuous and targeted increase of the ODA/GNI ratio (official development assistance as aproportion of gross national income): Germanyhas committed itself to the 0.7% target and willalso deploy innovative financing instruments,such as revenues derived from public sales ofemissions certificates, to achieve this.Expansion of Germany’s contribution to thefinancing of sustainable development andinvolvement in international activities designed to counteract the effects of the pandemic on implementation of the 2030 Agenda andthe Addis Ababa Action Agenda in partnercountries.The German Government believes that it isnecessary to further strengthen the UN’ssustainable development structures. TheCouncil for Sustainable Development hasdrawn up an options appraisal with steps thatcould be taken to achieve that goal.Greater public support for the 2030 Agenda is tobe drummed up in Germany. By way of cooperation particularly with representatives of civilsociety and other stakeholders, the intention isto work continuously to raise awareness of the2030 Agenda among the population in Germanyand encourage active public participation in thepursuit of the SDGs.Debts and debt sustainability: Germany willcontinue its activities within the UnitedNations, G20 and international financialinstitutions to facilitate innovative solutionsfor countries of the Global South. Germanysuccessfully campaigned at the G20 for a debtmoratorium for the poorest states to be kept inplace until 31 December 2021 to mitigate theimpact of the COVID 19 pandemic. Germanywill also continue to engage actively in theinternational discussions already taking placeon more detailed topics such as state insolvencymechanisms.Research and innovation: Germany sees researchand innovation as a core driver of sustainabledevelopment and therefore intends to stabilisecorresponding university partnership andscholarship programmes (above all via theGerman Academic Exchange Service (DAAD)and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation)and to expand research networks. The scholarships granted to particularly talented studentsfrom developing and newly industrialisedcountries (through the DAAD’s EPOS programme for development-related postgraduatecourses) and the Research Network SustainableGlobal Supply Chains can be cited here asexamples of this commitment.//Bearing in mind that it is more than five yearssince the 2030 Agenda was adopted and the firstcycle of the HLPF has run its course, and considering the findings of the first Global SustainableDevelopment Report (GSDR), the current state ofprogress is worrying. Quite apart from the COVID19 pandemic and its consequences, the globalchallenges facing our economies, social systemsand ecosystems are more present than they haveever been.//Recent months have moreover revealed just howlittle resilience many structures around the worldcan demonstrate. Both internationally and withinindividual countries, the disparity in livingstandards has markedly increased. Many youngpeople have been knocked back in their trainingand education. Across the globe, women inparticular have been and still are substantiallyaffected by the pandemic. They represent themajority of staff in the healthcare sector, oftenwork under precarious employment conditionsand provide unpaid care work for their families.//Climate change and species extinctions arecontinuing. However, a new sense of momentumhas emerged in several policy areas during thepandemic, to which the younger generation hasmade an especially large contribution.//Across the planet, global solidarity demands theresolution of the severe socio-economic crisesthat the pandemic has triggered in many economies. The international community finds itselffacing the challenge of making the global recoverysocially and environmentally sustainable and fair.The only way to achieve this is by cutting povertyworldwide, dismantling injustices and inequalities, combating climate change, overcomingenvironmental challenges and reducing genderinequalities. It is also important that individualcontributions to implementing the SDGs arerooted in respect for human rights – in otherwords that they are intertwined with existingfundamental human rights obligations. This willhelp ensure that global society is well prepared forfuture shocks and global challenges. In manycountries, crises and wars are undermining peace,security and sustainable development.//Germany will resolutely continue along the pathof socio-environmental transformation set out inthis report, as envisaged in the 2030 Agenda forSustainable Development, and advocate for thatpath at international organisations and conferences. The global challenges that the pandemichas drastically exacerbated call for a concertedresponse from the community of states and fromour international institutions, especially theUnited Nations. Germany and its partners champion this cause within the framework, for example, of the Alliance for Multilateralism. Tostrengthen peace and put an end to violence, theGerman Government backs lasting conflict resolution in which all stakeholders are included.//The focus is on constructing development routesthat will lead to climate neutrality and a moreefficient systemic use of resources, i.e. a circulareconomy, and on fulfilling our responsibility as ahighly globalised economy to ensure globallysustainable value and supply chains. It is encouraging that some major emitters have set themselves the target of net zero anthropogenicemissions by the middle of the century, especiallysince they are currently responsible for 63% ofglobal greenhouse gas emissions. This highlightsthe paradigm shift which is coming for the globaleconomy. //For its part, the German Government will push onand do all it can to nurture that sense of momentum and to support interested states in developingambitious programmes and legislation whichunderpin the declared decarbonisation objectiveswith concrete short and medium-term measures. //Sustainable development and digitalisationrequire major processes of economic transformation which will affect the life of society inwide-ranging ways. The two are closely related intheir logic, yet increasingly need to be moretightly dovetailed with one another. This willmean taking account not only of the potentialpositive aspects of the digital transition – such asmore efficient use of resources thanks to smarterprocesses, and more easily traceable value chains–but also of the potential negatives. These includeincreased consumption of energy and raw materials by IT technologies, the ramifications forcompetition, the labour market and data protection, and curtailments of human rights. The aim isto grasp the sustainable development opportunities offered by the digital transition while makingits risks manageable.//Given how intricately their economies are embedded in global value and supply chains, the industrialised countries bear special responsibility andhave an important role to play in leading the wayon worldwide sustainable economic development,sustainable investment, sustainable innovation,sustainable trade relations, sustainable consumption and production patterns, and decent work.The German Government will continue to workon this with its partners around the world andwith civil society, trade unions, business and theacademic community. //This VNR shows that sustainable development isan important guiding principle for GermanGovernment policy. Efforts to achieve sustainabilitywill be an ongoing task that extends acrosspolicy areas and legislative terms. The nextcomprehensive update to the German SustainableDevelopment Strategy is therefore planned for2023/2024, as initiated by the German Bundestagas part of the 2020 plenary week on sustainability.Germany will furthermore remain committed toachieving progress on sustainable developmentwithin the United Nations framework and theHigh-Level Political Forum (HLPF) in particularas well as in other formats such as the G7 andG20, and bilaterally//The path to sustainable development, be itglobally or nationally, has been made even morearduous by the pandemic, yet tread it we must. Wemust set the right course now, in all areas, toachieve the profound change that is so needed.Together, we can do it. Success is in our ownhands.