Japan has achieved steady economic growth since the end of World War II, developing into an advanced
industrial society. In recent years, however, circumstances surrounding the lives of the people have changed
drastically due to declining birthrateｓ and an aging population, in addition to changes in working styles of families
and communities.
//
The aging rate in Japan, which was 12.1% in 1990, has increased by 16.3 percentage points to 28.4% by 2019.
According to the report of the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research, "Japan's Future
Population Projections (2017 Estimates)," the estimated aging rate in 2040 is expected to reach 35.3%. It is also
estimated that the population aged 20-64, the core of the working population, will halve by 2040. Under these
circumstances, it is important to consider how society should be shaped in respond to this new situation.
//
There is an urgent need to halt the declining birthrate and aging population, particularly in rural areas, and to
overcome the decline in local populations and stagnant local economies. It is essential for local areas to secure their
own growth potential for the future. In order to create sustainable communities and revitalize regions where people
can live with hope for a prosperous future, it is necessary to give due consideration to the global environment,
ensuring economic growth and resolving social problems. Problems such as climate change, resource circulation,
and biodiversity are intensifying each year. In order to realize a society in which future generations can live in
affluence, the world is faced with a greater need to re-examine the conventional socio-economic paradigm of mass
production, mass consumption, and mass disposal, and transforming instead into a social system in which the
economy, society, and the environment can develop in a harmonized and integrated manner. As such, the SDGs,
incorporating economic, social, and environmental perspectives comprehensively, serves as an important guide for
Japan to develop in a sustainable manner.
//
Moreover, as the spread of COVID-19 has shown, globalization enables people, things, assets, or information to
move more easily from one country to another. On the one hand, such global interconnectedness makes Japan’s
economic activities and growth connect deeper with the international economic activities, but on the other hand,
the world is witnessing a combination of global-scale challenges, including poverty, widening disparities, issues on
gender, international health issues including infectious diseases, climate change and the biodiversity loss, other
environmental problems, and, what is more, civil wars and humanitarian crises caused by disasters, all of which are
becoming more and more serious, threatening the survival and dignity of individuals across national borders, with no single nation capable of addressing these problems in isolation. An exacerbation of these global-scale issues
could harm the stability of Japan’s social economy and the world at large. However, if the world can achieve all the
SDGs by 2030, livelihoods will greatly improve, leading to a better world. From these perspectives, as a responsible
member of the international community, under the principle of human security, Japan attaches great importance
toward working for the achievement of the SDGs, in cooperation with the international community.
//
The world is now facing a historic crisis. The COVID-19 Pandemic is affecting not only people's lives and
livelihoods, but also the economy, society, the international political and economic order, and many of other sides,
even people's behavior, consciousness, and values, at large. Furthermore, the spread of infectious diseases is
causing confusion and anxiety in many parts of the world, leading to fragmentation at various social levels
(community, regional, national, and international). These negative impacts are expected be wide-ranging and longlasting. We are facing a historical juncture toward a post-COVID-19 world, where the COVID-19 Pandemic is over,
whereby, the future of Japan and the world depends on whether drastic changes on issues such as climate change,
digitalization and gender equality, can be made over the next few years. 
//
In October 2020, Prime Minister Suga announced in his policy speech that the government of Japan would focus
on the realization of a green society by setting off a virtuous cycle between the economy and the environment. This
was articulated as one of the pillars of its growth strategy, with the aim of achieving "carbon neutrality," (which
means virtually zero greenhouse gas emissions) by 2050. He stated that a change in mindset was necessary – to
deal with global warming does not constrain economic growth, but rather relevant proactive measures can bring
about necessary changes in industrial structures and economic paradigms, thereby unleashing new growth
opportunities in the process. Similarly, in the context of the SDGs, the goals can be achieved efficiently and
effectively by leveraging new innovations and mobilizing policies, including regulatory reforms. In order to realize a
flexible and resilient socio-economic structure in the Post COVID-19 era, with a virtuous cycle between the economy
and the environment, it is necessary to promote changes in the behavior of society as a whole, involving all
stakeholders, while holding up the SDGs as a compass to promote initiatives that incorporate all perspectives of the
economy, society, and the environment, without sacrificing anything. Given the major changes under way, we are
facing the need for social transformation that anticipates the future, with a view to a new era, and to this end, it is
becoming vital for governments, businesses, civil society, academia, individuals, and other entities to start working
on this transformation from their respective standpoints. 
//
People in vulnerable situations are particularly hard hit by the COVID-19 pandemic, reinforcing the importance
of international collaboration and cooperation in that regard. To arrest the COVID-19 pandemic as soon as possible
and to prepare for the next global health crisis, it is important to actively contribute to the verification, reform, and
strengthening of the WHO, which plays a central role in international health issues, in addition to the strengthening
the health and medical systems of developing countries. In this connection, based on the idea of "Leaving No One's
Health Left Behind" and the concept of human security, Japan plans to fully support the achievement of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) in the international community by ensuring equitable access to vaccines, including in
developing countries.
//
Combatting the increasingly complex and ensuring humanitarian crises continues to be a major concern, for the
international community. The Government of Japan, stresses that humanitarianism, development, and peace must
not be undermined in the international community, recalling Secretary-General Guterres' call for a global ceasefire,
and places great importance on the “Humanitarian, Development, and Peace Nexus,” based on the idea of "Leaving
No One Behind”, and continues to sustain our efforts to achieve the SDGs. 
In the following chapters, we will review how we have promoted the SDGs thus far, and discuss how our efforts
should proceed in the future.
//
In order to promote the SDGs comprehensively and effectively both domestically and internationally by
cooperating closely with related administrative organs, the Government of Japan established the "SDGs Promotion
Headquarters" in the Cabinet in May 2016. The Headquarters is headed by the Prime Minister, with the Chief Cabinet
Secretary and the Minister for Foreign Affairs as deputy heads, and comprises all other Ministers of State. In order
to achieve the SDGs, it is essential to cooperate with every stakeholder, and from the perspective of emphasizing
public-private partnerships, the “SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings” was established in September 2016, in
which a wide range of stakeholders including the private sector, NGOs/NPOs, experts, international organizations,
and various groups participates. In December 2016, based on the active exchange of opinions at the Roundtable
Meetings, the Government formulated the “SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles," a medium- to long-term
strategy for the promotion of the SDGs, and strengthen the foundation to implement the SDGs, with the
Government taking leadership and creating synergies through coordination and cooperation with the efforts of each
stakeholder. 
//
Four years after the adoption of the SDGs by the United Nations in 2015, and three years after the Government
formulated the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles in 2016, the UN SDG Summit 2019 was held in September
2019 for the first time since the adoption of the SDGs to discuss the progress of the SDGs at the summit level. From Japan, then Prime Minister Abe attended the summit and shared his experience as chairperson of the G20 Osaka
Summit and the 7th Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD7), where he led initiatives in
the areas of environment, education, health, and quality infrastructure investment. In addition, as the Chief of the
SDGs Promotion Headquarters, then Prime Minister Abe introduced the efforts that had been made so far to
promote the SDGs and expressed his determination to further accelerate the efforts of the private sector and
regional revitalization in Japan and abroad by the next SDG Summit. UN Secretary-General António Guterres
expressed his concern over the delay in global efforts to achieve the SDGs, and strongly called for action from the
international community, designating the period up to 2030 as the "Decade of Action" to expand and accelerate
efforts to achieve the SDGs.
//
As the international community faces new and more serious challenges, there is an even greater need to
accelerate economic and social transformation and achieve solutions to global issues such as climate change and
social fragmentation and instability caused by growing poverty and inequality through systems-level approaches
and high-impact initiatives. Therefore, based on the fact that the first review of the SDGs Implementation Guiding
Principles was to be conducted by 2019, at the 8th meeting of the SDGs Promotion Headquarters held in December
2019, the Government of Japan revised the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles in a form that is more timely.
//
In the revision process, in accordance with the principles of the SDGs, and with a strong determination to
promote the SDGs not only by the government but in cooperation with multi-stakeholders, the Government had
frequent discussions and exchange of opinions with the members of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings, and
also made an effort to incorporate diverse opinions into the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles Revised Edition
through stakeholder meetings in which many citizens participated and public comments. Through the public
comments, 303 opinions were submitted, and the roles of major stakeholders were specified more extensively in
the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles Revised Edition.
//
Although many of the 17 goals and 169 targets of the SDGs have already been achieved in Japan, there are many
issues among these targets that Japan needs to tackle in terms of international cooperation in order to achieve them
globally. For this reason, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters has decided to list eight priority areas as pillars for
action in the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles Revised Edition. These priority areas have been restructured
to fit the Japanese context in order to indicate where Japan should particularly focus its efforts among the targets
and goals of the SDGs, and all priority areas include both domestic implementation and international cooperation
aspects. Each of these priority areas is categorized according to the “Five P's” (People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace, and
Partnership) of the 2030 Agenda. In the same way that all goals and targets in the SDGs are inseparable and must be addressed in an integrated manner, these priority areas are also closely related and inseparable, and all of them
must be addressed in an integrated manner, recognizing that the SDGs will not be achieved if any of them is missed.
//
In order to accelerate the Government's concrete efforts, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters has been
formulating the “SDGs Action Plan” every year since December 2017, which includes specific measures
implemented by all ministries and government agencies. The SDGs Action Plan aims to organize the specific
measures and their budget amounts, and to visualize the contribution of each project to the SDGs. Based on the
opinions of stakeholders, including the SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings, the Plan has evolved to specify the
total amount of initiatives, the ministries and government agencies in charge, and the goals to be covered.
//
The "SDGs Action Plan 2021" decided in December 2020, based on the fact that there are serious concerns about
delays in efforts to achieve the SDGs due to the spread of the COVID-19, states that "to realize the era with and
post-COVID-19 with a flexible and resilient economy and environment in a virtuous cycle, in which the SDGs are
achieved, it is necessary for a whole society to change its behavior and for all stakeholders to work together”. Based
on this principle, the Plan sets four priority areas in which Japan will accelerate efforts as follows: 1) Countering infectious disease and preparing for the next crisis;
2) Business for building back better and growth strategies through innovation;
3) SDGs-driven regional revitalization, Creating a virtuous cycle of economy and environment; and
4) Accelerating actions through empowerment and strengthening bonds among people. 
//
In addition, the Plan includes specific measures for comprehensive support to the development, production,
and dissemination of diagnostics, treatments, and vaccines for the COVID-19 and ensuring equitable access to them;
promotion of Universal Health Coverage (UHC); promotion of digital transformation; promotion of ESG investment;
a "2050 Carbon Neutral" challenge; countermeasures against marine plastic litter; local development driven by the
SDGs; and promotion of education for sustainable development (ESD).
//
The total amount of the SDGs Action Plan 2021, including support for measures to combat the COVID-19, was
approximately 6.5 trillion yen, nearly four times the amount of the previous year (approximately 1.7 trillion yen),
demonstrating the Government's concerted efforts to implement a variety of measures while taking the SDGs into
consideration.
//
Since its inception, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters and the SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings have been
held twice a year (only once in 2020 due to the spread of the COVID-19) to exchange opinions on Japan's efforts to
achieve the SDGs. The SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles Revised Edition decided in December 2019 states
that "the frequency of Secretariat Meetings and Roundtables Meetings should be increased to contribute to the
resolution of substantive issues," given that the SDGs have been promoted in a wide range of fields in the four years
since their adoption. It also states that, as a complement to these meetings, the Government will consider strengthening the system by holding issue-specific working groups of the Roundtable Meetings and related
stakeholder meetings in order to resolve cross-cutting issues. Based on this, it was pointed out at the July 2020
Roundtable Meetings that it is important to further accelerate discussions by establishing four working groups on
education, environment, progress management/monitoring, and public relations, and it was decided to promote
discussions in the four working groups by the summer of 2021. The following is a summary of the discussions in
each working group.
//
The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (Secretariat of the Japanese National
Commission for UNESCO), which is in charge of education administration and activities to realize the objectives of
UNESCO and the leading agency for SDG 4 (Education), and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is leading
promotion of the SDGs, collaborated with the working group on Education of the Japanese National Commission
for UNESCO to promote discussions.
//
In collaboration with the "SDGs Stakeholders Meeting" that the Ministry of the Environment has been
promoting since 2016, the Subcommittee held discussions involving a wide range of stakeholders on environmental
issues.
//
The working group listened to the opinions of experts who are already involved in SDGs public relations, such
as the media and advertising agencies, on know-how, good practices, and strategies for effective public relations,
and held discussions on the way to further strengthen SDGs public relations in the future.
//
The Subcommittee exchanged opinions on the status of indicators and evaluations in Japan that complement
the SDGs Global Indicators and discussed the progress of evaluation by the private sector members of the SDGs
Promotion Roundtable in preparing this VNR.
//
Therefore, in Japan, it is necessary to promote collaboration among a wide range of stakeholders in the
implementation, monitoring, follow-up, and review of the 2030 Agenda, transcending the barriers between
ministries and agencies, between national and local governments, and between the public and private sectors. In
addition, in addressing specific social issues, it is necessary to take fully into account the opinions of the
organizations concerned, based on the principles of inclusiveness and participation. For this reason, it is important
first and foremost to promote understanding of what the SDGs are among each and every citizen. Accordingly, the
government of Japan, under the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, has been actively advertising and engaging in
awareness-raising activities in order to raise domestic awareness of the SDGs, promote public awareness activities,
and disseminate information on SDGs activities. 
//
In order to share the good practices of the private sector and other organizations implementing the SDGs, the
"SDGs Action Platform" has been established, and the use of the logo mark (Japan Mark) has been recommended
to organizations working on the SDGs. In addition, the "Japan SDGs Award," which recognizes companies and
organizations working on the SDGs, and the "SDGs Future Cities," which selects municipalities that have presented
outstanding initiatives to achieve the SDGs, have been used to disseminate SDG model cases in the region. Moreover,
through the "Public-Private Partnership Platform for Local SDGs" and "Local SDGs Finance," we have promoted the
resolution of local issues through the principles of the SDGs, increased momentum for the promotion of the SDGs
in Japan and encouraged each individual to address the SDGs as his or her own personal matter. Furthermore, we
have actively participated in lectures and events throughout Japan, contributed to publications, promoted and
raised awareness in cooperation with influencers such as Hello Kitty and various industries (including media,
entertainment, transportation, etc.), and disseminated information through our website, SNS, and video
productions. These efforts have resulted in a high level of awareness of the SDGs in Japan, which is increasing year
by year. According to a survey conducted by Dentsu in 2021, as of April 2021, 54.2% of the population had become
aware of the SDGs, up from 29.1% in the 2020 survey.
//
In order to visualize the efforts being made in Japan to achieve the SDGs and encourage more stakeholders to
take action, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters has been holding the "Japan SDGs Award" since 2017 to recognize
companies, organizations, etc., that are making outstanding efforts to contribute to the achievement of the SDGs. 
//
At the first Japan SDGs Awards held in 2017, the Chief of SDGs Promotion Headquarter's (the Prime Minister's)
Award was presented to Shimokawa Town in Hokkaido, which has adopted the "Realization of a Sustainable
Community" into its basic ordinance and is working to address regional issues in an integrated manner through local
industries such as forestry and energy. In addition, based on the concept of "Leaving No One Behind,"
commendations were given to a non-profit organization that aims to improve the employment situations of people
with disabilities, a consumers’ co-operative that promotes waste-free consumption, a university that is working to
turn out next-generation leaders, and a company that is working to spread hand-washing practices and combat
Malaria in developing countries.
//
At the second Japan SDGs Awards held in 2018, the Chief of SDGs Promotion Headquarter's Award was
presented to the Japan Food Ecology Center, which contributes to the establishment of a "recycling-oriented
society" by producing liquid feed made from food that would otherwise be thrown away. In addition,
commendations were given to a local government that had become remarkable models both in Japan and abroad
with their high resource recycling rates, female junior and senior high school students who are boldly tackling the
problem of marine debris in their communities, a long-lived company that have been developing local traditional
culture through sustainable management over hundreds of years, media that are encouraging momentum for the
promotion of the SDGs, a medical institution, and a local financial institution.
//
At the third Japan SDGs Awards held in 2019, the Chief of SDGs Promotion Headquarter's Award was presented
to the Uomachi Shopping Street Promotion Association in Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka Prefecture, which became the
first shopping street to make a “SDGs Declaration” and take people- and environment-friendly actions through
events and services. In addition, commendations were given to a non-profit organization that provides school
lunches to children in Africa and Asia through social networking services, an eyeglass manufacturer that works to
support the eyesight of refugees and internally displaced persons in refugee camps overseas, a recycling company
that has developed a business model to collect used clothes and reuse them in developing countries while donating
polio vaccines, a board of education that promotes ESD in all public elementary, junior high, and special needs
schools, and a daycare center for children that engages everyone from preschoolers to adults in SDGs activities.
//
At the 4th Japan SDGs Awards held in 2020, the Chief of SDGs Promotion Headquarter's Award was presented
to Minna-Denryoku Co. Ltd. for its efforts to promote inter-regional cooperation through renewable energy. In
addition, commendations were given to a local government that is promoting the construction of a recycling oriented society based on agriculture, a high school that is working on the development of environmental and
agricultural technologies, a NPO that supports people with disabilities in Japan and Laos and provides self-reliance
support to former child soldiers in Africa and Asia, a the Japan Agricultural Cooperative, which expand various types
of partnerships in local areas.
//
Shimokawa Town is a small, depopulated area with a population of 3,400, in a region with a noticeably low
birthrate and an aging population, having a 39% aging rate. The “Shimokawa Basic Ordinance of Local Governance”,
which is said to be the town's constitution, clearly states that it aims to "realize a sustainable local community", and
the town is making integrated efforts to (1) build an integrated forestry industry (economy), (2) promote energy
self-sufficiency and decarbonization (environment), and (3) address its super-aging society (society).
//
Specifically, with a focus on sustainable forest management, the local government is promoting the production
and supply of appropriate timber and wood products, the use of forests for health and education, the use of unused
forest resources for renewable energy, and compact towns with renewable energy/heat supply systems at their core.
Through these efforts, Shimokawa Town aims to realize a local community where "all of its citizens continue to have
a place where they shine and live a healthy and meaningful life”. 
//
Under the corporate philosophy of "adding new value to food loss", the Japan Food Ecology Center has
developed liquid fermented livestock feed (“liquid eco-feed”) that makes effective use of food waste through
collaboration between industry, academia, and government, and has built a new business model that has two
aspects: a waste treatment business and a feed manufacturing business. By domestically producing high-quality
feed from food scraps from local sources, and substituting it for imported feed, the company is contributing to food
security by improving the feed self-sufficiency rate and supporting livestock management that is less susceptible to
grain price volatility. Pork raised using more than a certain percentage of the company's feed is branded, and a
sustainable "recycling loop" (recycling-based society) involving pig farmers, manufacturers, retailers, and consumers
is being established.
//
The Uomachi Shopping Street Association, a shopping
district in Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka Prefecture, has made an
"SDGs Declaration" and is implementing events and services
that meet the needs of people in a way that "leaves no one
behind" in cooperation with various stakeholders. 
//
Specifically, it promotes activities that focus on social
inclusion, such as support for the homeless and people with
disabilities, as well as local production for local consumption, such as reducing food loss in cooperation with
restaurants and selling nonstandard vegetables. Buildings in the shopping arcade have been renovated to provide
an environment for young entrepreneurs and working mothers, and permeable solar panels have been installed to
provide electricity for the shopping arcade. In addition, they are promoting the use of public transportation to visit
their stores and implementing renovation town planning in order to build public rest areas and revive under-utilized
real estate in the shopping district.
//
Minna-Denryoku has been operating a retail business in
the Setagaya District of Tokyo, supplying renewable energy
under the concept of "visualizing electricity" since 2016. The
company has introduced a system that allows consumers to
deliver a portion of their basic fee to the power generation
company of their choice, and benefits are delivered to
consumers if they continue the contract.
//
In addition, Minna-Denryoku realized the world-first
commercialization of an “Electricity Traceability System” utilizing block-chain technology, which visualized how
much electricitiy was bought from which power plant. In 2019, the company launched the “Yoko-Yoko Project”,
which links energy consumers in Yokohama City, Kanagawa Prefecture to electric power generators in Yokohama
Town, Aomori Prefecture. Minna-Denryoku aims to build a regional recycling symbiosis zone through electricity, and
to promote the decarbonization of cities and the revitalization of local economies in cooperation with the city of
Yokohama, which is a major consumer of energy, and the town of Yokohama, which has abundance of renewable
energy. 
//
Since 2018, the government of Japan has been selecting municipalities that propose outstanding initiatives to
achieve the SDGs, as "SDGs Future Cities", and selecting the initiatives of leading municipalities among the SDGs
Future Cities as "Municipal SDGs Model Projects”. A total of 124 cities have been selected as "SDGs Future Cities"
through four rounds of selection by FY2021, of which 10 projects have been selected as "Municipal SDGs Model
Projects" each year and subsidized by the government.
//
The selected cities formulate action plans with key performance indicators (KPIs) to achieve the goals, while
receiving advice from the Cabinet Office and the Task Force of Local Governments and Experts on SDGs. In setting
KPIs, the cities are recommended to use the "List of SDGs Local Indicators for Local Development (August 2019
edition [1st version])" published by the government. In addition, the progress of the initiatives is reported every
year, and progress is managed with follow-ups by experts and others. Based on this progress management, each
city promotes its plan while reviewing its efforts, and thus aims to achieve its goals while effectively implementing
the PDCA cycle. SDGs model cases for local development formed through this cycle are disseminated through the
government's website, etc., to promote the SDGs to other local governments, and thereby encourage the further
localization of the SDGs.
//
The line graph above shows the trend of the percentage of local governments working on the SDGs. In Phase II
of the “Comprehensive Revitalization Strategies for Cities, People, and Careers”, the government has set a target of
60% of local governments working on the SDGs by the end of FY2024. In 2017, the percentage was 1%; as of 2020,
it was 39.7%. In addition, the Comprehensive Strategy includes the KPI of selecting a total of 210 cities as the SDGs
Future Cities by the end of FY2024. Thus, we will continue to form SDGs model cases for local development, scaling
out horizontally in Japan. 
//
In August 2018, for the purpose of in-country implementation of the SDGs so that further revitalization of local
areas to be realized, the Cabinet Office established the SDGs for Regional Revitalization Public-Private Partnership
Platform as an information-sharing platform for the public and private sectors to deepen partnerships among a
diverse range of stakeholders, including businesses, NGOs, NPOs, universities and research institutions, trying to
solve local issues and revitalize local economies, in cooperation with the local governments. As of the end of May
2021, the platform has 5,423 members, of which 907 local governments (51.2% of all local governments) including
all prefectures and ordinance-designated cities, are participating.
//
The platform supports the matching of members who aim to solve regional issues as well as achieve the SDGs
and promotes the creation of new values through public-private and inter-sectoral cooperation on common
interests by establishing working groups based on thematic proposals from members. In FY2020, for the first time,
the good practices of public-private partnerships to solve regional issues through the SDGs were publicly called, and
especially prominent practices were officially announced.
//
In Phase II of the “Comprehensive Revitalization Strategies for Cities, People, and Careers”, the target number
of public-private matchings is 1,000 cases over the five years from FY2020 to FY2024. The cumulative sum as of
the end of February 2021 was 502 cases. We will continue to promote public-private partnerships to solve regional
issues by actively implementing matching support projects and holding subcommittee meetings.
//
In promoting regional development in line with the principles of the SDGs, it is important to create an
"autonomous virtuous circle" in which local businesses and other parties that are actively engaged in solving
regional issues are given priority support, and the profits earned by these businesses and other parties are
reinvested in the region. The first step in forming this "autonomous virtuous circle," was stated by the Cabinet Office
in the "Guidelines for SDGs for regional Revitalization Registration and Certification Systems for Local Government"
in October 2020. With the guidelines as a reference, local governments will take the lead in establishing a
registration and certification system for local businesses and other parties in order to recognize local businesses,
etc. that are actively working on the SDGs for local development, and to support local businesses and other parties
in cooperation with local financial institutions and various stakeholders, thereby helping to solve local issues and
revitalize local economies. The establishment of the registration and certification system is expected to expand the
base of local businesses that engages in the SDGs for regional development, and to expand their efforts to solve
regional issues. 
//
Phase II of the “Comprehensive Revitalization Strategies for Cities, People, and Careers” aims to increase the
number of local governments working on the SDGs for Regional Revitalization Finance to 100 over five years from
FY2020 to FY2024. The number of local governments was 58 as of December 2020.
//
From the perspective that the involvement and collaboration of various stakeholders is important for the
promotion and dissemination of the SDGs, the SDG Implementation Guiding Principles stipulates the roles of 11
stakeholders as follows. Hereafter, we introduce each stakeholder along with their main initiatives. 
//
It is important for each company to strive for sustainable corporate growth by installing the SDGs within its
corporate strategy and applying them to individual business strategies. In addition, it is important to increase
momentum, in Japan and abroad, for companies to contribute to the achievement of the SDGs through various
efforts, including their own core business, and through cooperation between the private and public sector. 
//
For gender equality and the empowerment of women, inclusiveness and fairness in the labor market will be
encouraged.
//
The SDGs have been adopted across corporate management, especially in large companies, to a certain extent
due to the increase in consumer awareness of the impact of corporate activities on global and social issues and the
increase in ESG investment. However, the challenge is to further spread the SDGs to small- and medium-sized
companies, which account for 99.7% of all businesses. It is important for small- and medium-sized companies, which
support local communities and economies, to boost SDGs initiatives.
//
Efforts related to business and human rights, responsible supply chains, and corporate social responsibilities
are important for increasing the trust of the international community in each company, and gaining high reputation
among global investors. Such initiatives are also essential for the private sector — which is the core of production
and consumption, to contribute to the development of the sustainable economy, society and environment for which
the SDGs aim. The Government, through the cooperation of the relevant ministries and agencies, including the
formulation of a National Action Plan, will takes appropriate measures and promotes corporate efforts to contribute
to the SDGs, based on the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. 
//
Keidanren (the Japan Business Federation) has proposed an approach to
achieving the SDGs through the realization of “Society 5.0 for SDGs”, in which
private companies exercise their powers of creativity and innovation. Society 5.0
for SDGs is a human-centered creative society that aims to solve society’s problems
and create economic value through the use of digital technologies by diverse
people with imagination and creativity. In November 2017, Keidanren fully revised
its “Charter of Corporate Behavior”, which enumerates the principles of conduct
that member companies must follow, in order to implement its vision of Society 5.0 for SDGs.
//
In November 2020, Keidanren announced the “New Growth Strategy," which aims to achive sustainable
capitalism by bringing together the wisdom of a variety of stakeholders to co-create diverse value through digital
innovation. As part of the strategy, Keidanren has set "Carbon Neutrality in 2050" as its ideal society and is
accelerating its efforts to decarbonize through "Challenge Zero”
3
. In addition, Keidanren announced that it aims to
“increase the percentage of women board officers to more than 30% by 2030”
//
A special SDGs website has been set up and updated to collect the innovative
initiatives of member companies toward the realization of Society 5.0 for SDGs. The website allows users to search
by the 17 goals and 169 targets of the SDGs, as well as by company name. It is intended to serve as a catalyst for
collaboration and open innovation among various stakeholders, including competitors, other industries, universities,
research institutions and local communities. 
//
Keidanren participates in the HLPF on Sustainable Development and side events held during the UN General
Assembly Week to disseminate information on the efforts of Keidanren and Japanese companies, and holds
dialogues for collaboration with UN agencies and global SDGs promoting organizations. Based on a Memorandum
of Cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Keidanren co-hosts symposiums and
other events. In addition, Keidanren, the University of Tokyo and the Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF) have conducted joint research and published a report4
that presents concrete measures for the evolution of ESG
investment that will contribute to the realization of Society 5.0 for SDGs.
//
In order to continually expand the financing base to secure the funds needed to achieve the SDGs, it is important
to incorporate initiatives for achieving the SDGs into economic activities in a variety of ways. It is necessary to
effectively use and mobilize both public funding (public financial funds, etc.) and private funding (investment and
lending) while expanding the amount and enhancing the quality of funds. 
//
In order to achieve the SDGs, it is essential to provide financial support for civil society and private non-profit
organizations among others, which advance solutions to social issues as creators of sustainable societies. 
//
Since the SDGs harmonize the three dimensions of sustainable development (economy, society, and
environment), it is important for the mobilization of private funds toward achieving the SDGs to accelerate the
expansion of such finances as: ESG finance (which factors in the importance of environment, society, and
governance), impact finance, social finance, SDGs finance, and others, taking into consideration not only
economic returns but also social returns, such as the issuance of JICA bonds as social bonds. In future, it will be
necessary to disclose the information of these mechanisms and verify their effectiveness when supporting the
expansion of the ESG financing and putting these finances into practical use.
//
Additionally, financing to promote climate change measures and de-carbonization is important. In recent years,
companies are increasingly interested in disclosing climate-related information internationally based on the “TCFD
Recommendations” announced in 2017 by the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) installed
at the request of the G20. In the future, it will be necessary to actively disclose corporate information based on the
TCFD recommendations and promote the appropriate use of disclosed information by investors. 
//
In July 2019, the Advisory Panel on New Funds for Achieving the SDGs was launched to discuss the following
issues: 1) (with regard to financing through tax collection) taxation at time of emigration and immigration, measures
to finance travel documents and visas, and digital taxation of financial transactions (taxation on stock and bond
transactions and foreign exchange transactions); and 2) (with regard to policy on the mobilization of private capital)
promotion of impact investment, promotion of the SDGs bond investment, use of blended finance, and so forth. In
July 2020, a report was presented that included the following points.
//
Taxation at time of emigration and immigration should take into account the current situation of the
international aviation sector, which is facing a crisis due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Measures to finance travel documents and visas are considered to have very low cost-benefit.
Among financial transaction taxes, taxes on stock and bond transaction would have a significant negative
impact on the market. International cooperation is essential for the realization of an exchange transaction
tax, but there is no prospect at present.
A framework on digital taxation is currently being negotiated, and this process is closely monitored.
//
In order to expand impact investment, it is necessary to create international standards for impact
evaluation and to promote their use domestically.
In order to promote the ESG investment, it would be useful to provide incentives within the tax system.
Another idea is to consider the issuance of bonds by domestic aid agencies that specialize in SDGs-related
projects.
In the areas of blended finance, it is important to increase the number of projects in social fields such as
nutrition, public health, and international health, where it is not easy to mobilize funds by private sectors.
//
In order to realize a society that “leave no one behind,” civil society is expected to act as a bridge by bringing
the voices of people who are in severe difficulties or likely to be left behind to the attention of national and local
governments and sharing knowledge so that their voices can be reflected in the planning processes of SDGs-related
measures.
//
At the same time, utilizing networks in the international community and within Japan, civil society is also
expected to act as a promoter, bringing up and disseminating domestic and international issues, recommending
policies, and driving actions to accelerate and expand the efforts for the promotion of the SDGs.
//
Since Japan’s last VNR, the number of civil society activities to achieve the SDGs has dramatically increased. The
following are the major cases in which the Japan Civil Society Network on the SDGs (SDGs Japan), an NGO working
to achieve the SDGs, has been involved.
//
I. Since 2018, the SDGs Japan has led the preparation and publication of the "SDGs Bottom-up Action Plan"
as aconcrete policy proposal document for achieving the SDGs "without leaving anyone behind,"
complementing the SDGs Action Plan formulated by the government, from the perspective of civil society.
II. The SDGs Japan has played a central role in implementing proposals and events to achieve the SDGs in the
fieldsof the environment, education, international health, poverty, gender, social responsibility, disability,
community, development, development finance, disaster prevention and mitigation, and youth.
III. As a forum to heighten public concerns about the SDGs and encourage action through networking
andpartnerships among various stakeholders, "Our SDGs" was established with the participation of two
governmental organizations, including JICA, two academic societies, including the Japan Society for
International Development, and five NGOs and NPOs, including SDGs Japan. Even under the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020, six online seminars on the theme of "SDGs and COVID-19" were held, with the
participation of many citizens.
IV. Seizing the opportunity of the successive publication of SDGs-related books, the Asahi Shimbun and SDGs
Japanco-hosted the online seminar "Ask the Author" (six times, approximately 6,000 registered participants
in total), which increased understanding and interest in the
SDGs and encouraged concrete action.
V. Since March 2020, SDGs Japan has released five statements
(inJapanese and English) and introduced civil society’s
statements on its website, considering that "response in line
with the principles of the SDGs is essential for recovery from
pandemics”. 
//
In addition to the efforts above, a wide variety of other initiatives have been implemented in various fields and
regions. Citizens' interest in achieving the SDGs has been steadily increasing, with local NGOs and NPOs taking the
lead in establishing multi-sectoral indicators to measure the achievement of the SDGs. In light of the fact that pre-existing disparities, inequalities, poverty, and discrimination have been getting worse
under the pandemic, civil society efforts to "leave no one behind" need to be mainstreamed in the achievement of
the SDGs.
//
It is noteworthy that civil society's efforts to address the COVID-19 and poverty, such as private support groups,
food banks, children's cafeterias, support for women, suicide prevention, and support for the homeless and person
facing economic hardship are all working to maintain and expand their activities while taking thorough measures to
prevent infection.Rather than public support, many local activities are funded by private donations and grants. How to maintain
and expand these activities will be important viewpoint from the perspective of "leaving no one behind”. For example, according to the "Questionnaire Survey of Leaders Addressing Social and Community Issues",
which was conducted by ETIC and ABeam Consulting in July 2020, collecting voices from more than 100 NPOs and
other organizations, about 84% of surveyed organizations were negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. It
can be said that challenges remain in maintaining and expanding civil activities and civil society.
//
The efforts of Japanese civil society in international cooperation have continued to develop within the
framework of collaboration, consultation, and involvement with the government and private sectors, which was
formulated throughout the 2000s. Since 2017 when the last VNR was submitted, the situation has matured.
//
Looking back at the efforts of civil societies in Japan on international cooperation quantitatively from 2017 to
present, the number of NPOs with "international cooperation" as a business category has increased from 9,300 to
9,800 between 2017 and 2019, according to the Cabinet Office; the amount of contracts for "Japan NGO
Collaboration Grant Aid", for which MOFA provides ODA funds to Japanese international cooperation NGOs for
economic and social development projects in developing countries, is in the range of 5 billion yen; and the
expenditure of Japan Platform business, which is the system to realize the equal partnership among NGOs, the
government, and economic entities to collaborate for the emergent humanitarian assistance, is in the range of 6
billion yen. Moreover, there has been some progress in advancing collaboration between the private sector and
private foundations and NGOs, based on the development of information technology and the expansion of the ESG
investment.
//
With regard to multi-sectoral cooperation, including dialogue with governments and policy proposals based on
official dialogue frameworks, dialogues have been accumulated, such as the formal regular meetings with MOFA.
Some of the results of these dialogues include "Strategies for NGO/NPO Response to COVID-19 pandemic" at the
NGO Study Session of MOFA, and regular official dialogues on countermeasures against new COVID-19 infections at
the GII/IDI Roundtable. Japanese civil society has also emphasized its presence in global civil society by making
recommendations on "business and human rights," international health, and science, technology, and innovation
(STI) policies at the G7, G20, and the UN SDGs processes.
In the past four years, the world has seen a number of significant changes with regard to international
cooperation: the visible improvement in the capacity of civil society in developing countries; the emergence of
unprecedented crises on a global scale, such as disasters caused by climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic;
and the introduction of various scientific and technological innovations including in developing countries. Japanese
civil societies involved in international cooperation are aware of the need to respond to these changes and create
dynamic changes that go beyond the current "maturity" in both qualitative and quantitative terms.
//
Since production and consumption are inseparable, sustainable production and consumption should be
fostered at the same time. Based on this understanding, the Government of Japan will encourage consumers and
citizens to take voluntary initiatives as major players in the consumption arena.
In particular, from the perspective of SDG 12 (Production/Consumption), consumers should contribute to
building economic and social systems and to raise awareness, as well as to create sound markets by coordinating
sustainable consumption activities such as contributing to the transition to a circular economy with a low
environmental impact in order to consolidate sustainable production and consumption patterns.
//
On December 27, 2019, the “Ethical Consumption Highschool Championship 2019” was held in Tokushima
Prefecture, and awards were presented to high schools and other organizations engaged in activities that promote
ethical consumption.
There was a wide range of activities, and it was apparent that high school students, concerned by the issues
facing their communities and society, were thinking about what they could do and putting their ideas into practice
in cooperation with local residents and various organizations.
Tokushima Prefectural Tokushima Commercial High School, which is working with the Cambodia-Japan
Friendship Middle and High School to increase production of palm sugar and develop sustainable products, won the
"Minister of State for Special Missions (Consumer Affairs and Food Safety) Award”.
Tokushima Prefectural Anan Support School, which has been making bamboo paper and compost using bamboo
powder and rice in order to regenerate local abandoned bamboo forests, received the “Consumer Affairs Agency
Director-General's Special Prize”. 
Ehime Prefectural Misaki High School, which revived the traditional culture of sakiori weaving, developed
sustainable products using oranges, and produced disaster prevention books from the viewpoint of food, clothing, and shelter in order to improve the retention rate of local human resources, received the “Tokushima Prefectural
Governor's Award”. 
Aichi Prefectural Aichi Commercial High School, which has registered its honey trademark as "Tokugawa Honey"
and is developing sustainable products using the honey, received the “Tokushima Prefectural Board of Education's
Director of Education Award”.
And Sapporo Odori High School in Sapporo, Hokkaido, which has developed teaching materials on the SDGs and
fair trade, and has developed products and produced and sold eco-wraps in cooperation with local industries,
received the “Japan Ethical Promotion Council's President's Award”.
The event attracted many visitors from all over Japan including about 20 high schools, in addition to the
presenting schools, and became an opportunity to widely disseminate ethical consumption initiatives by high school
students and others throughout Japan and to increase momentum for the spread and promotion of ethical
consumption.
//
Currently, the “New Public Commons” – made up not of conventional government agencies but rather of local
residents, NPOs, and others – is actively solving familiar issues such as education and child-care, community
planning, crime, disaster risk reduction, healthcare and welfare, consumer protection, and so on.
Starting with cooperatives, private entities including cooperative associations, responsible for public activities
with local residents participating in the spirit of mutual cooperation, are expected to contribute to the SDGs by
building a humane society based on independence and symbiosis, rebuilding regional ties to solve the accumulated
problems of respective region.
//
The Japanese Consumers’ Co-operative Union (JCCU), a national federation of consumer co-ops, formulated
and adopted the "Co-op SDGs Action Declaration" in 2018, which declares the commitment of all co-ops in Japan to
make a significant social contribution to the achievement of the SDGs. In conjunction with the adoption of the action
declaration, the "Co-op Action Plan for the SDGs 2018" was drafted and implemented with a variety of initiatives.
Specifically, JCCU has been developing and supplying products that are compatible with ethical consumption,
taking into consideration the local community, environment, society, and people, as well as conducting activities to
encourage members to use such products through all co-ops in Japan.
JCCU is also actively involved in the use of renewable energy, support for children through UNICEF, and support
for disaster-stricken areas.
//
As bearers of social dialogue, labor unions are expected to make an important contribution to the realization of
decent work and the building of a sustainable economy and society through domestic and international efforts for
the establishment of workers' rights, human rights, the environment, safety, and peace, as well as the securing of
appropriate working conditions through collective labor-management relations. Additionally, labor unions are expected to contribute to achieving multiple goals; namely, SDG1 (No Poverty),
SDG5 (Gender Equality), SDG10 (Reduced Inequalities), SDG12 (Production/ Consumption), and SDG16 (Peace and
Justice), in addition to SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth), through securing proper work environments and
labor conditions. 
//
In the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles, labor unions, as a vehicle for social dialogue, are expected to
make important contributions to achieving decent work for all and building a sustainable economy and society by
ensuring fair labor conditions, human rights, environmental protection, safety, and peace both at the national and
international levels, and by exercising mechanisms for collective employer-employee relationships. 
Since 2016, the Japanese Trade Union Confederation (hereinafter referred to as RENGO), the national center of
labor unions, has incorporated their coming efforts to solve various issues related to the SDGs in its campaign policy,
and has been promoting the SDGs based on "sustainability," in which a hopeful future is passed on to the next
generation, and "inclusion," in which people recognize and support each other so that no one is left behind. The 17
goals of the SDGs are associated with all of their relevant efforts in their concrete action guide and policies. In this
sense, the labor movement is the SDGs itself, and RENGO engages in dialogue, collaboration, and cooperation with
various groups and organizations, including the government, administration, management groups, and NPOs to
achieve the SDGs.
//
Through the labor movement, including the Spring Offensive, RENGO is promoting its efforts to correct the
disparity between the size of companies, types of employment, and gender, as well as long working hours.
However, RENGO's nationwide labor consultations (20,828 consultations received annually in 2020 [JanuaryDecember]) include various consultations on employment, discrimination, wages, etc., indicating that workers are
facing many problems. These are issues that need to be resolved in line with the achievement of the SDGs and
accompanied by the realization of decent work.
//
In addition, in promoting a "green recovery" toward the realization of "carbon neutrality," it is necessary for
countries to work together and collaborate on sustainable development as a whole world, based on the principles
of the SDGs. In particular, it is extremely important to achieve a "fair transition" that minimizes the impact on the
employment of working people. To achieve this, active social dialogue with relevant parties, including labor unions,
is necessary in order to present multiple scenarios and options, considering uncertainties in economic and social
conditions, and to build consensus through careful public discussion.
//
The International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), of which RENGO is a member, has set SDGs 1, 5, 8, 10, 13,
and 16, which are particularly relevant to workers, as priority goals and is working to achieve those goals through
various campaigns. One of these campaigns is to designate October 7 of each year as the "Global Day of Action for
Decent Work," a day for workers to review how they work and to take simultaneous action around the world. Every
year, RENGO participates in the campaign and raises awareness of decent work through street actions and at various
meetings such as RENGO's regular conferences.
//
With regard to cooperation with civil society, RENGO has positioned the "NGO-Labor International Collaboration
Forum," which was established 20 years ago, as a forum where NGOs and labor unions can work together to solve
international social issues by utilizing their respective characteristics and is working to help achieve the SDGs.
Currently, through the activities of issue-specific groups, including the Child Labor Group (SDG8), the HIV/AIDS and
Other Infectious Diseases Group (SDG3, 8, 10), and the Maternal and Child Health Group (SDG3, 5), RENGO is
promoting awareness-raising activities for union members and the public, as well as effortsto resolve issues through
cooperation with NGOs. Moreover, it conducts activities on advertisement and policy proposals as a member of the
Network on Child-Labor Steering Committee, which consists of labor union and civil society organizations. 
//
Today’s young people and the generations to follow will be core of society in 2030 and thereafter and of the
post-SDGs discussion. Utilizing the “Next-Generation Platform for Promoting SDGs” launched in December 0f 2018,
from the year 2020, young people are expected to think about how to promote the SDGs and how to transform
society when they become main players; act as builders of a sustainable society while cooperating with a variety of
people; and propose and share ideas in Japan and around the world. From this perspective, since the next generation is expected to contribute to a wide range of areas without
being limited to specific goals, it is also important to enhance education policies and systems to enable young people
with various backgrounds to contribute to the achievement of each goal, including SDG4 (Quality Education). 
//
In order to deepen the involvement of the next generation, who will play a leading role in promoting the SDGs
after 2030, the "Next-Generation Platform for Promoting SDGs” was launched at the SDG Promotion Headquarters
in December 2018 to showcase Japan's SDGs model including the next generation.
In addition to the activities of each organization participating in the platform, the following activities were
mainly conducted on the platform.
1) In March 2019, on the occasion of the World Assembly for Women (WAW!), platform members exchanged
opinions with Malala Yusufzai on the promotion and improvement of quality education for girls and the
role of corporations in the social and economic advancement of women.
2) In April 2019, platform members serving as the Japanese delegation to the UN Economic and Social Council
Youth Forum in New York remarked on the importance of Japanese youth participation in achieving the
SDGs. In addition, a side event was held with the aim of promoting institutional and inclusive participation
by young people in achieving the SDGs and strengthening networks among young people in other countries.
3) In May 2019, platform members disseminated Japan's next-generation initiatives to the international
community at the "SDGs Global Festival of Action 2019" hosted by UNDP in Bonn, Germany.
4) In July 2019, platform members participated in a reception hosted by the Japanese government on the
occasion of the HLPF and disseminated Japan's SDGs model including the next generation.
5) In February 2020, platform members discussed with Jayathma Wickramanayake, Special Envoy of the UN
Secretary-General for Youth Affairs, when she visited Japan, how Japanese youth can contribute to a society
where "no one is left behind," as emphasized by the SDGs, and issues that have not been addressed so far.
//
Education plays an important role in achieving SDG4 (Quality Education) from the viewpoint of fostering
“builders of a sustainable society,” utilizing opportunities for education and learning in schools, local society,
households, and other places. At the same time, education also plays a very important role in contributing to the
development of human resources in the form of people who can see regional and global issues as their own and
think of solutions to them by themselves as the builders of a sustainable society, laying the foundation for achieving
all goals of the SDGs. 
//
Supporting the adoption by UNESCO and the UN of “Education for Sustainable Development: Towards Achieving
the SDGs (ESD for 2030),” a framework which contributes to the achievement of all the goals of the SDGs, the
Government of Japan will contribute to the enhancement of activities in Japan and abroad. Within Japan, upon the
revision of the National Curriculum Standards with the aim of fostering “builders of a sustainable society,” the
UNESCO Associated Schools Network, which are hubs for advancing ESD, shall be activated, at the same time
promoting the creation of an environment where students can learn while connecting to various cultures as they
support the SDGs, including social education related institutions.
//
In Japan, in order to realize the principles of UNESCO as stated in its Charter, UNESCO has positioned “UNESCO
Associated Schools”, which are schools that practice peace and international cooperation as centers for promoting
ESD, and is supporting the practice of ESD. In addition, the new National Curriculum Standards, which have
sequentially started to implement since 2020 academic year, are referred to the development of "the builders of a
sustainable society”.
In 2021, the national implementation plan for ESD was revised based on “ESD for 2030,” an international
framework for ESD that was launched in 2020, in order to promote ESD with the involvement of various domestic
stakeholders. Besides, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) provides support
to universities, local governments, NPOs, and other organizations that train teachers and develop curricula to foster
ESD leaders.
Steadily extending ESD based on the new National Curriculum Standards is expected to raise awareness of the
SDGs among the younger generation and their parents' generation, and to encourage the generation that learned
the SDGs at school be active in 2030 and beyond.
//
⑨ Research Institutions
Needless to say, academic research and science, technology, and innovation (STI) carried out by research
institutions play important roles in and of themselves as tools for the achievement of the SDGs. In addition, they
are also expected to contribute both domestically and internationally as tools to understand the current situation
such as earth observation; as a basis for setting goals; and for mutual target relationship analysis, achievement
evaluation, and post the SDGs discussions. Furthermore, based on these scientific grounds, research institutions are
expected to lead dramatic transformations of science, technology, and innovation in the future. 
//
Moreover, while innovation and transformation are keys to achieving goals, it is necessary to note that
innovation should be treated as a broader concept that also includes social changes, rather than emphasizing
technical aspects only.
Sharing vision and information among scientists and citizens, businesses, and government is necessary to
recognize that science, technology, and innovation can play a significant role in achieving the SDGs and raise
awareness of various issues and urgencies. In addition, it is important for the science community to foster
cooperation and collaboration with broader stakeholders under international initiatives such as the Future Earth.
//
The United Nations University Institute for the Advanced Study of Sustainability (UNU-IAS) is a think tank of the
UN Organization established in Japan with a mission to address global issues through policy-responsive research,
post-graduate education, and capacity building. Under the UNU-IAS Strategic Plan 2020-2024, the UNU-IAS is
implementing research programs in the fields of biodiversity, water resources management, ESD, and governance
for sustainable development, etc., and is publishing research papers and policy briefs, networking internationally
through the International Partnership for the Satoyama Initiative (271 organizations worldwide as of April 2021) and
the Regional Centres of Expertise on ESD (RCEs, 179 centers worldwide as of April 2021), reaching out internationally
at the HLPF on Sustainable Development, events held by UNESCO and other organizations, and through the
international treaties such as the CBD or the UNFCCC. In the area of governance, the UNU-IAS analyzed VNRs
submitted to the UN by governments and conducted research on policies on the SDGs in each country. 
//
As for the educational programs of the UNU-IAS, graduate education programs (master's and doctoral) have
been established for students from all over the world, including Asia, Africa, and North and South America, and
higher education is being conducted in collaboration with the research programs as above. In addition, in 2020, the
“SDG-Universities Platform (SDG-UP)” was established to strengthen cooperation among universities in Japan
centered on the SDGs, contributing to sustainable development in Japan and abroad through higher education
partnerships.
//
The UNU-IAS has also contributed to the localization of the SDGs, establishing the “Asia-Pacific Mayors Academy
for Sustainable Urban Development” since 2019 with partner organizations such as the United Nations Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) to help build a network of regional leaders committed to
sustainable urban development. In Japan, we are working on the SDGs Future Vision. In Japan, the UNU-IAS has
contributed to the selection of SDG Future Cities, and the “Operating Unit Ishikawa Kanazawa (OUIK)”, which the
UNU-IAS manages jointly with Ishikawa Prefecture and
Kanazawa City, co-hosted the Hokuriku SDGs Stakeholders
Meeting 2019 with the Kanazawa Institute of Technology in
December 2019, providing an opportunity for people
involved in the SDGs in various capacities, such as
companies, local governments, and civic organizations in the
region, to participate and discuss how the future should be.
//
Under the concept of strengthening synergies between
each goal of the SDGs in its new strategic plan, the UNU-IAS
has established new themes for research, education, and
outreach activities, such as monitoring and evaluation systems for key policies and the SDGs for climate change etc.,
sustainable finance, artificial intelligence (AI), and social value creation. 
//
It is necessary to spread the SDGs widely throughout Japan in order to realize a society where “no one will be
left behind”. To this end, it is indispensable for local government to incorporate the SDGs into their strategies and
policies as much as possible, and further penetration and mainstreaming of the SDGs at the local level are expected. Currently, many regions of Japan are grappling with issues such as population decline and shrinking regional
economies. The initiatives of local governments to achieve the SDGs are exactly what will contribute to the
resolution of these regional challenges, with local revitalization driven by the SDGs expected to be promoted. The
government of Japan continues to support the dissemination of leading models by selecting local governments that
propose good practices toward the achievement of the SDGs which contribute to local development as “SDGs Future
Cities”. In addition to accelerating initiatives to achieve the SDGs, local governments are expected to proactively share,
both domestically and abroad, excellent examples from each region. Specifically, local governments all over Japan
are expected to lead SDGs driven regional revitalization, based on the Declaration of the “SDGs Japan Model” and
the “SDGs All Japan Meeting.” At the same time, by holding national and international events, cooperation between
and within nations, among regional blocks, and between local governments aiming to solve common regional issues,are expected, leading to further initiatives to achieve the SDGs. Additionally, in the future, more local governments
are expected to approach various stakeholders with the aim of further penetration of the SDGs. 
//
For creating frameworks, local governments are expected to promote the establishment of cross-departmental
promotion organizations and the development of systems of administration; reflect SDG elements in various plans;
establish governance methods to manage progress; accurately measure SDG initiatives to disseminate information
and share results; promote cooperation with stakeholders both in Japan and overseas; and set local indicators,
among others. Additionally, they are expected to further promote the resolution of regional issues through the
construction of a cooperative framework between regional level officials, citizens, and multi-stakeholders.
Furthermore, they are expected to establish a registration/certification system for local businesses in order to create
an autonomous virtuous circle through “SDGs for Regional Revitalization Finance.”
Local governments are expected to promote the implementation of diverse and unique localizations of the SDGs
such as creating “Circular and Ecological Economies (CEEs),” which form a sustainable society by utilizing local
resources including culture, natural features, organization/ community, in addition to energy, natural resources,
urban infrastructure, and industrial agglomeration in each region.
//
In 2018, Toyama City in Toyama Prefecture, Shimokawa Town in Hokkaido, and Kitakyushu City in Fukuoka
Prefecture, and in 2019 Hamamatsu City in Shizuoka Prefecture, conducted Voluntary Local Reviews (VLRs) at the
local level in cooperation with the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). Each participating region
presented its own VLR at the HLPF. In order to encourage local governments to engage in VLRs, IGES established the
“VLR Lab”, a platform which collects worldwide information on VLRs. VLRs are conducted by each local government
and review each government’s system and efforts so far to promote SDGs, which leads to the sharing of the
experiences and issues within Japan and abroad. The government of Japan therefore decided to encourage active
engagement in the VLRs in The SDG Implementation Guiding Principles revised in 2019. The preparation and
presentation of VLRs in international forums such as the HLPF leads to deepening international cooperation among
local governments, and further VLRs conducted by local governments is expected.
//
As stated in the 2030 Agenda, parliamentarians/legislators are deemed to play an integral role from the
perspective of effective implementation and accountability. In order to realize a society where “no one will be left
behind” in Japan, the National Diet and local assemblies are expected to listen to the voices of citizens from all over
Japan so that their voices are reflected in national and local government policies.
Moreover, parliaments are expected to cooperate with administrative agencies, civil society, and international
organizations, and propose concrete policy options to solve social issues we face at both national and regional level.
//
In formulating the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles, various political parties held meetings for hearings
from the government and private organizations.
In January 2016, the Komeito Party established an “SDGs Promotion Committee” to promote government
efforts on the SDGs in cooperation with NGOs such as civil groups. In December 2019, the party submitted a
"Proposal for Revising the SDG Implementation Guiding Principles" to the government, requesting further
acceleration of its efforts to achieve the SDGs in Japan and abroad. Subsequently, in December 2020, to strengthen
its efforts to promote the SDGs further, the Committee was upgraded to the "SDGs Promotion Headquarters".
Furthermore, in April 2017, the Liberal-Democratc Party (LDP)'s parliamentary league on the SDGs was launched.
In July 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the parliamentary league handed the government the "Challenges
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in Light of the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Strong Promotion
of the SDGs through Partnership among Parliament, Government, the Business Community, and Civil Society.” It
pointed out that the principles of the SDGs are important in these times of crisis, and that it is important to continue
to promote the efforts that Japan has made so far, such as human security and UHC.
In April 2021, the Nonpartisan Parliamentary League held the “Meeting on the Strategic Role of NGOs and NPOs”
and submitted a resolution to the Secretariat of the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, stating the importance of
dialogue between the government and civil society in preparing this VNR.
In addition, each party has been working on the SDGs and opportunities for dialogue with the government and
civil society have been created.
//
As mentioned above, the government has identified eight priority issues as the pillars of its efforts to
promote the SDGs. These issues have been selected and restructured in line with the Japanese context in order
to indicate what Japan should focus on in particular among the goals and targets of the SDGs, and all priority
issues include both domestic implementation and international cooperation aspects. The following is a
description of the major efforts that have been made to date and the challenges that lie ahead for each priority
issue.
//
The key phrase "no one will be left behind" expresses the fundamental philosophy that underpins the 2030
Agenda, which calls for efforts to address the challenges faced by women, children, youth, people with disabilities,
people living with HIV/AIDS, the elderly, indigenous peoples, refugees, internally displaced persons, and migrants.
Respect for human rights as a universal value in the international community, the realization of gender equality,
and the mainstreaming of gender perspectives are essential to the realization of all the SDGs as cross-cutting values,
and it is necessary to ensure that these perspectives are always taken into account in all efforts and to reflect them
in all measures, as clearly stated in the SDG Implementation Guiding Principles.
Japan has been focusing on reaching vulnerable groups first in its efforts to address all issues in domestic
implementation and international cooperation. In particular, in international cooperation, based on the principle of
human security, taking account that sustainable development and sustained peace are inextricably linked, Japan has
emphasized the concept of "humanitarian-development-peace nexus", which provides seamless support to ensure
the protection and empowerment of each individual.
Vulnerable populations have been greatly affected by the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, and further action
is required.
//
With regard to the promotion of gender equality and women's empowerment, based on the Basic Act for
Gender Equal Society enacted in 1999, the Government of Japan formulates the Basic Plan for Gender Equality every
five years, which stipulates the basic direction of measures and specific efforts, and promotes measures in a
comprehensive and systematic manner. In addition, in order to accelerate move toward empowerment of women,
the government has decided on the "The Intensive Policy to Accelerate the Empowerment of Women" in June every
year since 2015, which is reflected in the budget requests of each government ministry.
//
The Fifth Basic Plan for Gender Equality: “Toward Reiwa society where all women and girls can thrive and
achieve their full potential", which was approved by the Cabinet in December 2020, includes the following points:
(1) expansion of women's participation in all fields, (2) elimination of violence against women, (3) regional efforts
to expand the base of gender equality, and (4) perspectives on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same
time, it aims to create a society by 2030s in which everyone can play an active role without being conscious of their
gender and in which there is no gender bias in the number of people in leadership positions. As a way to achieve
these goals, it has set a goal to increase the percentage of women in leadership position to around 30% as early as
possible in the 2020s.
//
In promoting the Fifth Basic Plan, the Council for Gender Equality will check the progress of particularly
important items every year, and in 2023, it will inspect and evaluate the achievement status of all 89 outcome
targets. These outcome targets are related to the various efforts to achieve Goal 5 of the SDGs. In addition, when
necessary, the Council could express its opinions to the Prime Minister and relevant ministers so as to encourage
further efforts.
In addition, in response to the Prime Minister's instructions, the government has decided "The Intensive Policy
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 2021" which includes specific proposals to be worked on in
FY2021 and FY2022 to achieve the targets for the promotion and employment of women included in the Basic Plan.
//
On the legislative front, in May 2018, the Act on the Promotion of Gender Equality in the Political Field was
enacted with the aim of effectively and positively promoting gender equality in the political field and thereby
contributing to the development of gender-equal democratic politics in which men and women can participate
jointly. The basic principle of this law is to aim for an equal number of male and female candidates in elections to
the House of Representatives, the House of Councilors, and local assemblies, and it also stipulates the
responsibilities of national and local governments and their voluntary efforts, such as setting targets for the number
of male and female candidates for official position belonging to political parties. The Fifth Basic Plan for Gender
Equality states that some of the reasons for the lack of progress in Japan's efforts include: the difficulty of balancing
candidacy and political activities in the political field with family life, the lack of opportunities for human resource
development, the existence of harassment against candidates and politicians, and the stereotyped perception of
gender roles and unconscious bias in society as a whole. It is necessary to promote discussions on gender equality
by strengthening cooperation among political parties, the Diet, and local assemblies, as well as requesting political
parties to take effective positive actions.
//
In addition, in August 2015, the “Act on the Promotion of Female Participation and Career Advancement in the
Workplace” was enacted with the aim of realizing a society in which all women who wish to play an active role in
working situations can fully demonstrate their personality and capabilities. This new law obliged central and local
governments and companies with 301 or more regular workers to formulate and publish the action plans which
include numerical targets about the proportion of recruiting women, the proportion of women in managerial posts
and others and to disclose information about women’s empowerment. In 2019, the law was partially revised to expand the scope of the obligation to formulate action plans, strengthen information disclosure, and extend it to
companies with 101 or more full-time employees from FY2022.
//
In order to encourage companies to take action, the Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI), in
cooperation with the Tokyo Stock Exchange, has been selecting about 50 listed companies since FY2012 that excel
in promoting the activities of women as "Nadeshiko Brands", which are attractive to investors who focus on
improving corporate value over the medium to long term. Furthermore, companies that have made use of the
abilities of diverse human resources, including women, to create innovations and improve productivity are selected
through the "New Diversity Management Selection 100 Program" and "Diversity Management Selection 100 Prime
" awards to promote the awareness and spread of diversity management.
//
In addition, from the perspective of promoting sustainable corporate growth and increasing corporate value
over the medium to long term through corporate governance reforms, the revisions of the Corporate Governance
Code and the Guidelines for Investors and Company Engagement in June 2018 clearly state the need to ensure
diversity in terms of gender, internationalism, etc. on the board.
Moreover, the revisions of the Corporate Governance Code and the Guidelines for Investors and Company
Engagement in June 2021 call for the disclosure of policies and measurable voluntary goals for ensuring diversity in
middle managerial positions (e.g., the promotion of women, foreign nationals, and midcareer hires).
//
Furthermore, in order to prevent working women from leaving their jobs unwantedly due to pregnancy,
childbirth, and other life events, and to increase the wellbeing of individuals and the diversity of human resources
in companies, starting in FY2021, the government will subsidize projects in which FemTech companies, companies
that employ women, medical institutions, and local governments collaborate to provide support services using
FemTech and other products and services.
In light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the lives and employment of women, the government's
basic policy for dealing with the COVID-19 pandemics clearly states that "when implementing various measures, full
consideration will be given to the impact on women" and measures are being implemented.
//
By creating a platform for women's activities, Sabae City has been promoting international information
dissemination, awareness-raising, and stakeholder collaboration at its activity bases, taking advantage of the
regional characteristics of the city, which has long been family-oriented and has a climate that facilitates women's
participation in society. Through the fostering of female entrepreneurs, the creation of jobs by inviting satellite
offices, and community development through citizen cooperation, Sabae City is creating a “place to be” and a
“turnout” while building a city where women can shine, and fostering the empowerment of women which leads to
the empowerment of children, men, and the entire region.
//
Japan has formulated the Basic Programme for Persons with Disabilities and promotes measures to support
the independence and social participation of persons with disabilities, to realize a society of coexistence in which
all citizens mutually support and respect each other's personality and individuality without being separated on the
basis of disability.
//
From the perspective of facilitating mobility, the government is comprehensively promoting barrier-free
passenger facilities and vehicles, barrier-free areas around stations through the creation of Barrier-Free Master
Plans or Barrier-Free Action Plans by municipalities and barrier-free mindsets by calling on the understanding and
cooperation of the public. Furthermore, in order to promote the employment of people with disabilities, the
Government of Japan provides guidance to employers who have not achieved the legally mandated employment
rate, etc., and works to introduce jobs to people with disabilities according to their wishes and characteristics,
support their retention, and raise awareness of reasonable accommodation.
In addition, in order to make people aware of the importance of understanding and accepting differences in
race, disability, etc., the government distributes awareness-raising booklets and awareness-raising videos, holds
human rights classes at schools, etc., and widely holds hands-on human rights classes, including experienceoriented human rights classes such as wheelchair experience and Para-Sports experience, in cooperation and
collaboration with various private organizations. It is also important to improve the environment so that children
with and without disabilities can receive education together as much as possible. Therefore, the government
provides support to school providers to make their facilities barrier-free and secure the necessary human resources
to support children with special needs, including children requiring medical care, so that children can learn
according to their disabilities, provides families of children with disability with necessary information to help them
decide where to go to school appropriately, and promotes cooperation among medical and welfare services.
//
Furthermore, in order to realize a society of harmonious coexistence with foreign nationals, the government
formulated the "Comprehensive Measures for Acceptance and Coexistence of Foreign nationals” in December 2018
(revised in December 2019 and July 2020). In order to realize an inclusive society where all people support mutually
and value each other's human rights and to realize a supportive and harmonious society, the government
implements human rights awareness-raising activities and promotes the environment arrangement through
measures such as the provision of information in multiple languages and plain Japanese on administrative
procedures and local amenities, the creation of a local community that is easy to live in by improving the
consultation system, the development of an environment for accepting foreign patients at medical institutions,
the enhancement of Japanese language education and measures for children of foreign nationals. 
//
As a network to watch over elderly consumers with dementia, people with disabilities, and other consumers
who require consideration, the government is working to promote the establishment of "Local Councils for
Ensuring the Safety of Consumer" (watch-over networks), which were stipulated in the 2014 amendment to the
Consumer Safety Act and have been established in 327 local governments as of March 2021. The Local Councils for
Ensuring the Safety of Consumer initiative enables the provision of watch-over services that contribute to the
prevention of consumer harm, including early detection and solution, by linking related parties such as local
consumer affairs centers and consumer groups to existing welfare networks.
//
In order to cope with the challenges that Japan is facing, such as the decline in the working-age population due
to the declining birthrate and aging society and the diversification of the needs of working people, it is necessary to
increase productivity through investment and innovation, as well as to expand job opportunities and create an
environment where people can fully demonstrate their motivation and abilities.
To this end, the Government of Japan is promoting the following initiatives to reform the way people work,
aiming to create a virtuous cycle of growth and distribution by realizing a society where people can choose various
ways of working according to their individual circumstances, so that each and every worker can have a better outlook
for the future. In addition, telework has expanded rapidly since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the
government is promoting and developing telework that contributes to the reform of work styles and women's
activities by holding seminars and consultations for small- and medium-sized enterprises, providing support for the
introduction of telework by experts, and presenting awards for advanced cases:
 Improving the treatment of non-regular workers, including equal pay for equal work
 Correction of long working hours and development of an environment that facilitates flexible
work styles (e.g., upper limits on overtime work, strengthening of industrial physician and
industrial health functions)
 Support for productivity improvements and wage increases
 Promotion of women's and young people's activities (support for the return to work of full-time
female employees who have left the workforce due to child rearing, etc., promotion of men's use
of childcare leave, consistent new skills development for young people, etc.)
 Investment in human resources and promotion of measures to secure human resources
 Balancing work and medical treatment, supporting the employment of the disabled and elderly,
etc.
//
For those who are in need, comprehensive support is provided through the Self-Support System for the Needy,
and for those who are unable to maintain a minimum standard of living due to poverty, the necessary guarantees
for a healthy and cultural minimum standard of living are provided based on the Public Assistance Act.
In addition, in order to support the elderly and disabled who are living on pensions and whose income is low
even if pensions are included, the government will continue to steadily provide support benefits for pensioners,
which are based on approximately 5,000 yen per month and are paid in addition to pensions.
Looking at the changing demographics of welfare recipients, while the total number of people receiving public
assistance in 2018 remained unchanged from the previous year, the number of welfare recipients aged 65 and over
was 1.04 million, an increase from the previous year (1.03 million). Furthermore, the ratio of welfare recipients to
the population aged 65 and over was 2.93%, the same level as the previous year.
It is necessary to continue to closely monitor the impact of the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic on people.
//
In order to address the issue of child poverty, the "Act on the Promotion of Policy on Child Poverty" was enacted
in June 2013, and in response to this, the government formulated the “General Principles of Policy on Child Poverty",
which stipulates the basic policy on measures to cope with child poverty, indicators on child poverty, priority
measures for the time being to improve the indicators, surveys, and research on child poverty, and a system to
promote these measures.
Based on these efforts, in June 2019, the "Act on Partial Revision of the Act on the Promotion of Policy on Child
Poverty" was enacted by lawmakers. The purpose of the revised law is to comprehensively promote measures
against child poverty, not only for the "future" of children but also for their "present" lives, in the spirit of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and to give priority to the best interests of the child, as well as to clearly state
that there are various social factors behind poverty. In November of the same year, based on the amendment to the
law and the recommendations made by the Expert Committee on Child Poverty Measures, which heard opinions
from a wide range of stakeholders, the government approved the new "General Principles of Policy on Child Poverty"
at a Cabinet meeting.
//
Based on these Principles, the Government of Japan will implement measures with a view to the present and
future of children in order to break the cycle of poverty and will take comprehensive and early measures to provide
support that puts children first, aiming to realize a society in which all children can have hopes and dreams. In
promoting measures against child poverty, the Government of Japan will establish a seamless support system from
the period of pregnancy and childbirth for parents to the social independence of their children, detect children and
families whom support is not reaching or is difficult to reach and take measures at an early stage, and enhance
efforts by local governments based on local conditions. In addition, in order to promote society's understanding of
child poverty, the government is actively promoting cooperation and collaboration between the private and public
49
sectors to create an environment where society as a whole can support children who are trying to grow positively
despite their circumstances, such as by developing a national campaign of countermeasures on child poverty called
the "Kodomo no Mirai Ōen Kokumin Undō" (the National Movement in Support of Children’s Future).
//
In light of the importance of early childhood education in fostering the foundation for lifelong character
development, and in order to ensure that all children have the opportunity to receive high-quality early childhood
education, the government is working to improve financial support through such measures as the introduction of
free early childhood education and childcare (to be completely free from October 2019, after a phased introduction)
and a new system to support higher education (establishment of a tuition reduction and exemption system, and
expansion of scholarships), among others. And the government is also working to improve the quality of education.
In addition, the government is working to promote special needs education in schools to further enhance the
education of children with disabilities, lifelong learning for people with disabilities after they graduate from school,
and other education and learning to promote gender equality.
//
In addition, as mentioned above, the new National Curriculum Standards are referred to the development of
"the builders of a sustainable society”. Through the steady implementation of the National Curriculum Standards, it
is expected that awareness of the SDGs will increase among the younger generation and their parents' generation,
and that the generation that learned about the SDGs at school will play an active role in the future in 2030 and
beyond. In accordance with the Act on the Promotion of Environmental Conservation Activities through
Environmental Education, which aims to build a sustainable society in line with the SDGs, environmental education
and Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) are also being promoted, including educator training, promotion
of experiential learning, information dissemination, and encouragement of initiatives through an award system. In
order to realize a sustainable society, it is important for various actors involved in ESD to collaborate and cooperate
in a cross-sectoral manner to promote ESD. For example, the Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology are jointly developing and operating an ESD promotion network. 
//
Furthermore, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, online education is being introduced into the educational field,
and efforts are being made to improve the ICT environment in schools by integrating hardware, software, and
human resources, such as the "one digital device per student" system for students in compulsory education and the
development of high-speed, high-capacity communication networks in schools.
//
Amid growing international calls for corporations to respect human rights, the UN Human Rights Council has
endorsed the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, and the protection and promotion of human
rights has been positioned as an important element in achieving the SDGs. Against this background, in October 2020,
relevant government ministries and agencies cooperated to formulate a national action plan(NAP) on "Business and
Human Rights" in order to promote respect for human rights in business activities.
50
The NAP lists a series of measures related to business and human rights to be implemented by the Government.
It also sets out expectations for business enterprises to promote introducing human rights due diligence that is a
process of identifying, preventing and mitigating, addressing, and accounting for impacts of business activities on
human rights in the context of their business activities. 
//
Through the implementation and promotion of the NAP, the Government of Japan endeavors to ensure the
coherence of policy measures taken by the relevant ministries and agencies with regard to business and human
rights. In doing so, the Government expects to promote responsible business activities; contribute to the protection
and promotion of human rights of people who are adversely affected by business activities and to the protection
and promotion of human rights for society as a whole, including international society; enhance corporate values
and international competitiveness; and contribute to the achievement of SDGs.
//
It has been pointed out that the COVID-19 pandemic has exposed highlighted vulnerabilities in supply chains
and company operations regarding labor conditions. Considering these global trends, the Government of Japan, will
steadily implement the NAP to ensure responsible business activities with a view to promoting further efforts to
realize the SDGs based on the principle of human security.
//
Japan has been promoting cooperation with the international community and support for developing countries
in order to realize gender equality and promote women's empowerment, based on the belief that enabling women
to realize their full potential is essential for bringing vitality to society as a whole and supporting growth. In May
2016, the government announced the " Development Strategy for the Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
" as one of the new sectoral development policies based on the " Development Cooperation Charter ", and also
announced that it would implement the human resource development of about 5,000 female administrative
officials and other personnel, and improvement of learning for about 50,000 girls in the three years from 2016 to
2018.As a result, 11,345 female administrative officers and other personnel have been trained and 61,173 girls'
learning has been improved. In addition, at the 5th World Assembly for Women (WAW!) held in March 2019, in
order to promote women's empowerment in developing countries, the Government of Japan expressed its
commitment to provide quality education and human resource development opportunities to at least 4 million
women in developing countries in the three years to 2022.
//
The Government of Japan formulated a national action plan for implementing Security Council Resolution 1325
(the first Security Council resolution to explicitly link women’s issues to peace and security issues) and other relevant
resolutions. Prime Minister Abe back then announced the formulation of the plan in his address to the General
Debate of the UN General Assembly in New York in September 2015. In March 2019, after three years of
implementation from 2016, the National Action Plan was revised and the Second National Action Plan was
formulated through exchanges of opinions with relevant government ministries and agencies, NGOs and experts,
and public comments.
In peacekeeping operations (PKO), the importance of female personnel is further increasing. Japan has
dispatched four Headquarters staff personnel to the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and has continuously dispatched female personnel at a rate of 25-50% since 2018, and will continue to
promote gender initiatives, including the dispatch of female personnel. In addition, Japanese personnel dispatched
under the Act on Cooperation with United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and Other Operations (PKO Act) have
received training on gender issues as a part of predevelopment training and are expected to conduct gendersensitive activities at their destination.
//
Japan has been supporting education in developing countries in a wide range of fields, including basic education,
higher education, and vocational training, with an emphasis on human resource development, which is the
cornerstone of nation-building and growth. In the "Learning Strategy for Peace and Growth" announced in
September 2015, the following basic principles were set: 1) Educational cooperation to achieve inclusive, equitable
and quality learning, 2) Educational cooperation for industrial, science & technology human resource development
and sustainable social economic development, and 3) Establishment and expansion of international/regional
network for educational cooperation to support developing countries in achieving the SDGs.
//
For example, through the "Master's Degree and Internship Program of African Business Education Initiative for
Youth” (ABE Initiative), which aims to foster young personnel who can contribute to the development of industries
in Africa as well as to be a "navigator" for Japanese firms operating in Africa, young Africans are invited to Japan
and provided with opportunities to obtain a master's degree at Japanese universities and internships at Japanese
companies. A total of 1,285 trainees (including 329 female trainees) have been accepted from FY2014 to FY2019,
and a total of 1,028 trainees have already completed the program. Furthermore, in order to bring together the best
minds of Japan and ASEAN and to support the further development of countries in the region in the field of science,
technology, and innovation (STI), the AUN/SEED-Net network was established in 2003 to connect 14 Japanese
universities and 26 top engineering universities in ASEAN in the field of engineering. In addition, JICA launched the
JICA Development Studies Program in 2018 as one of the measures related to the "Meiji 150th Anniversary"
promoted by the government, and is promoting regional revitalization in Japan, revitalization of university
education, and global human resource development in Japan through the acceptance of outstanding human
resources from developing countries.
//
Japan’s International cooperation projects promote the participation of people with disabilities and support the
promotion of independent living for people with disabilities in developing countries. There are also many Japanese
NGOs working to support the independent lives of people with disabilities and victims of conflicts. The 4th Japan
SDGs Award from Minister for Foreign Affairs was presented to "Support for Woman's Happiness," a non-profit
organization that has established a system for people with disabilities to support each other between Japan and
Laos by cooperating with business employing persons with disabilities to produce souvenirs and deliver them to
local companies, and "Terra Renaissance," which supports the reintegration of former child soldiers into society and
helps improve the livelihoods of victims of conflict, including sexual violence.
//
In preparation for the Olympic and Paralympic Games Tokyo 2020, Japan is promoting the "Sport for Tomorrow"
program, in which it is working to support the building of an inclusive society and international cooperation in such
areas as conflict and post-disaster care through sports. By the end of September 2020, approximately 12 million
people in 204 countries and regions will benefit from this program. In the future, the government plans to take
advantage of the opportunity to host a series of large-scale international sporting events, such as the Olympic and
Paralympic Games Tokyo 2020 and the World Masters Games 2021 KANSAI, to raise awareness of the SDGs and to
engage in educational activities concerning the potential of sports to contribute to solving various social issues.
//
The COVID-19 pandemic has reaffirmed the importance of health and medical systems. Infectious diseases are
not a problem of one country alone but require the international community to work together as one. Japan has
long emphasized efforts in the fields of health and medicine under the principle of human security. In order to
prepare for the next crisis, it is essential to verify, reform, and strengthen the functions of WHO, which plays a central
role in international health issues, and to strengthen the health and medical systems of developing countries.
//
Japan has a track record of achieving the world's longest healthy life expectancy through its universal health
insurance system for more than 50 years. Japan's healthy life expectancy is 72.14 years for men and 74.79 years for
women (2016), which is high by global standards. Nevertheless, the large gap between healthy life expectancy and
average life expectancy has been pointed out as an issue. It is important to extend the healthy life expectancy in
order to reduce the burden of nursing care and to ensure a healthy life for the elderly.
//
Japan's medical care and nursing care delivery systems have been steadily developed under the medical
insurance system, which has achieved world-class universal health insurance, and the long-term care insurance
system, which has become firmly established in society 21 years after its establishment. However, with the aging of
society, the disease structure has changed due to the increasing incidence of chronic diseases among the elderly,
and the need to maintain and improve the quality of life (QOL) while living with illness has increased. At the same
time, the number of elderly people with dementia and those who require intensive nursing care is increasing, and
the need for cooperation between medical care and nursing care with medical needs is becoming more important
than ever. In particular, each region is required to establish a flow of appropriate service provision for dementia, as
well as appropriate diagnosis and response from the early stage. In addition, as the population structure changes,
it is important to ensure the sustainability of both the medical insurance system and the long-term care insurance
system by balancing benefits and burdens.
//
In this context, it is necessary to re-examine the medical and nursing care delivery systems from the perspective
of the citizens who use the services, to ensure that services that meet their needs are provided seamlessly and
efficiently. In addition, it is necessary to integrate the services with those for securing suitable housing, lifestyle
support for independence, disease prevention and nursing care prevention, etc., in accordance with the actual
conditions of aging in each region, such as urban areas where the population is rapidly aging and depopulated areas
where the population is declining.
In this way, the government is working to build a seamless medical and nursing care provision system from the
user's perspective, aiming to realize care that supports the independence and dignity of each citizen in a sustainable
manner in the future.
It is also important for companies to promote "health and productivity management," a strategic approach to
maintaining and improving the health of their employees. The Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI) is
implementing an award system for health and productivity management (the Health & Productivity Stock Selection
program and the Certified Health & Management Organization Recognition program) in order to create an
environment in which companies that engage in health and productivity management can be more highly evaluated.
//
In addition, it is important to support lifetime physical and mental health by practicing a nutritionally balanced
diet, etc. In March 2021, the government created the Fourth Basic Plan for the Promotion of Shokuiku (Food and
Nutrition Education), which focuses on the promotion of Shokuiku to support sustainable food and nutrition as one
of the priority issues. Based on this plan, various stakeholders will deepen their mutual opinions, collaborate, and
cooperate to promote Shouiku as a national campaign, while taking into account the concept of the SDGs, in order
to realize healthy dietary habits of citizenry and a sustainable society that is conscious of the environment and food
culture.
//
In order to promote a "walkable city" where people can get the amount of exercise they need in their daily lives
and enjoy the joy of interaction and a sense of purpose in life through social participation, the city is implementing
the optimization of community bus routes, the development of ‘Wellness Town’ as a base, and model classes that
link the SDGs and programming education. By increasing the number of pedestrians in the city and consolidating
urban functions into a bustling city center where people can interact with each other, Mitsuke City is we are working
to create a sustainable city for the future.
//
Japan has long emphasized international efforts in the field of healthcare, which is directly linked to human
security. Following the Cabinet decision on the "Development Cooperation Charter" in February 2015, the
government established the Basic Design for Peace and Health in September of the same year as a task-specific
policy for the health sector. This policy indicates that, while utilizing Japan's knowledge, technology, medical
equipment, and services, the government will (1) aim for lifelong UHC for all people, and (2) build a system to
respond to public health crises such as Ebola. These efforts are important in pursuing solutions to the health sector
challenges set forth in the SDGs, and in helping recipient countries to consider and solve their own health issues.
//
In addition, in the "Healthcare Policy" approved by the Cabinet in July 2014, expansion of the health and medical
care sectors overseas was set as one of the pillars, and the "Basic Principles of the Asia Health and Wellbeing
Initiative" was decided in July 2016 and the "Basic Principles of the Africa Health and Wellbeing Initiative" in June
2019.
The Government of Japan has also been actively leading efforts to achieve UHC as a "Japan brand" in
international forums such as the G7, the Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD), and the
United Nations General Assembly. In December 2017, it co-hosted the UHC FORUM 2017 together with WHO, the
World Bank, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), and UHC2030, and adopted the "Tokyo Declaration on
Universal Health Coverage" as a commitment to accelerate efforts to achieve UHC by 2030.
//
At the G20 Osaka Summit in June 2019, held under the chairmanship of Japan, specific measures to resolve the
issues of achieving UHC, supporting healthy and vibrant aging, and tackling health crises including Antimicrobial
Resistance (AMR) were discussed. In conjunction with the Osaka Summit, a joint session of G20 Finance and Health
Ministers was held for the first time in the G20 to discuss the importance of addressing UHC at an early stage of
economic development, and the importance of efforts to design health financing systems through cooperation
among finance and health authorities. In October of the same year, the G20 Okayama Health Ministers' Meeting
was held, and its Ministerial Declaration was adopted, which included the policy directions necessary to achieve
UHC.
//
At the Seventh Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD7) in August 2019, based on the
outcomes of TICAD VI and the G20 Osaka Summit, the Yokohama Declaration 2019 was adopted, and the Yokohama
Action Plan 2019 was released as its annex. The Yokohama Action Plan confirms that efforts to achieve UHC in Africa
will be further promoted. The meeting also discussed strengthening health systems, including sustainable health
financing through enhanced coordination among health and financial authorities, capacity building, combating
communicable and non-communicable diseases, improving maternal and child health, improving nutrition, water,
and sanitation, and promoting partnerships with the private sector and it was confirmed that efforts to achieve UHC
in Africa will be further promoted.
//
Japan is also contributing to the improvement of healthcare in emerging countries through the international
expansion of healthcare industry. Specifically, in order to contribute to solving medical, nursing care, and health
issues in emerging countries in a sustainable manner, the government supports the operationalization of medical,
nursing care, and health services by Japanese hospitals and companies overseas. From 2010 to 2020, we have
supported approximately 165 overseas development projects in emerging and developing countries.
With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, Japan has been able to keep the mortality rate from the COVID-19
pandemic at one of the lowest levels in the world thanks to the health system it has built up, including its universal
health insurance system. Utilizing this experience, Japan is cooperating with the international community to achieve
UHC based on the principle of "No one's Health Left Behind" in the global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic,
which is a threat to human security.
//
Based on this concept, Japan has provided more than 170 billion yen (about 1.54 billion US dollars) in in response
the COVID-19 pandemic crisis at an unprecedented speed since February 2020. Japan will continue to develop the
international environment to (1) overcome the current infectious disease crisis, (2) strengthen health systems that
will also help prepare for future health crises, and (3) ensure health security in a wider range of sectors. In addition,
JICA has published a guidance note "Establishing Gender-Responsive Approaches to COVID-19 Response and
Recovery (June 2020)", which describes impact of COVID-19 on women as well as necessary actions for the
implementation of development cooperation. In accordance with this guidance note, JICA is working on activities
that will contribute not to leaving women and girls behind in the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
//
In June 2021, the Government of Japan and Gavi co-hosted the COVAX AMC Summit online. The purpose of this
meeting was to raise funds to secure the necessary vaccines by the end of 2021 to ensure equitable access to safe,
effective, and quality-assured vaccines for developing countries through the COVAX Facility in order to contain the
COVID-19.Prime Minister Suga called for further solidarity and commitment from the international community in the fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic, stating that Japan fully supports the delivery of safe and effective vaccines to as
many people as possible in an equitable manner to achieve universal health coverage under the principle of human
security. Prime Minister Suga then introduced Japan's support for the COVAX Facility's efforts, noting that Japan has
contributed $200 million to the facility and will contribute an additional $800 million. He also expressed his intention
to supply 30 million doses of vaccines manufactured in Japan to countries and regions through the COVAX Facility,
etc., at an appropriate time when the environment is ready.In the session on cooperation with partners, including the private sector, Minister Motegi emphasized the
concept of "last mile support" to deliver vaccines to vaccination sites in each country by utilizing Japan's
technologies and strengths, and called for cooperation with the COVAX Facility.
As a result of this meeting, many governments and the private sector expressed their willingness to contribute
additional funds, and it was secured an amount far in excess of the funding target (8.3 billion dollars) for securing
1.8 billion doses of vaccines (equivalent to about 30% of the population of the target developing countries).
//
Since the 1970s, Japan has supported a total of 24 hospitals overseas, including three core hospitals in Vietnam,
and contributed to the development of medical system infrastructure and the training of professional human
resources. The experience of Bach Mai Hospital during the SARS epidemic in 2003 as well as Japan’s support for
strengthening infectious disease research and laboratory testing systems over the past 15 years have contributed
to the success of Vietnam's countermeasures against COVID-19.
Cho Ray Hospital, the core hospital in the south of the country, received and treated Vietnam’s first patient with
COVID-19. In the second wave of the outbreak in central Vietnam, Cho Ray Hospital dispatched a team of medical
equipment, including respirators, and medical personnel to support the care of critically ill patients. In addition, Cho
Ray Hospital is distributing manuals and providing training to 25 southern provinces to raise the level of
preparedness.
The National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology (NIHE) has been playing a central role in the establishment
and expansion of a nationwide laboratory network for COVID-19. From February 2020, the Japanese government
and JICA have provided additional support to strengthen the testing capacity, which contribute to the increase in
the number of testing facilities (from 4 to 86) in Vietnam.
In addition, the NIHE is involved in the joint development of antibody test kits for COVID-19 and the preparation
of testing guidelines together with Nagasaki University.
//
Japan has continued to support the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) in Kenya and the Noguchi
Memorial Institute for Medical Research (NMIMR) in Ghana as core research centers, both in terms of intangible
measures through technical cooperation and tangible measures through grant aid. Japan is also conducting many
joint research projects with international organizations and universities around the world with the support of JICA.
Since February 2020, Japan has also been providing materials and equipment such as test kits and test
consumables to support countermeasures against the COVID-19 pandemic. Of the number of PCR tests for COVID19 performed in Kenya, 60% were performed at KEMRI during the peak period, and of the number of PCR tests for
COVID-19 in Ghana, 80% were performed at the NMIMR during the peak period. KEMRI and NMIMR are also
providing training to strengthen the capacity of testing for infectious disease control in East Africa and West Africa,
respectively.
//
In response to a request from the ASEAN Secretariat amid increasing COVID-19 infections, Japan expressed its
full support for the establishment of the ASEAN Centre for Public Health Emergencies and Emerging Diseases at the
Special ASEAN+3 Summit on COVID-19 held on April 14, 2020. As a regional hub, the Centre aims to further
strengthen the region's capacities for infectious diseases by strengthening ASEAN's capacity to prepare for, detect,
and respond to public health crises and emerging infectious diseases. Specifically, it aims to strengthen surveillance,
form laboratory networks, and provide training to public health officials in charge of public health. Japan contributed
approximately 5.5 billion yen ($50 million) to the Japan-ASEAN Integration Fund for the establishment of the Centre.
//
The establishment of the Centre was officially announced at the event held following the Japan-ASEAN Summit
Meeting on November 12, 2020, and Prime Minister Suga expressed Japan’s willingness to provide continuous
support beyond its establishment. Japan is considering dispatching experts and providing training through JICA's
technical cooperation to help the Centre develop into an institution that will protect the people of ASEAN from the
threat of infectious diseases and will continue to provide support.
//
In April 2020, in response to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, Japan, together with the World Bank,
established the Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Multi-Donor Trust (HEPRT) in order to further
support developing countries' rapid response to infectious diseases and strengthen their preparedness for future
infectious diseases. In September 2020, as the first project under the fund, the provision of assistance to Sudan
was decided to strengthen its health system, including the development of a pandemic response plan and the
establishment of an inspection and monitoring system and further provision of assistance to developing countries
will be decided.
//
The Maternal and Child Health Handbook (MCH Handbook) is a booklet that can be used continuously record
the condition of a mother and child during pregnancy and childbirth, as well as the child's growth and health. In
Japan, the use of the MCH Handbook began in 1948, when the scope of the handbook, which was previously used
to manage the health of expectant and nursing mothers themselves, was expanded to include infants, and the
country is now one of the countries with the fewest deaths of mothers and children. The M CH Handbook is one of
the most important tools to ensure that mothers and their children continue to receive the care they need, and it
also serves as a childcare book that can be referred to at home. Based on its own experience, Japan has been
supporting the introduction and dissemination of the MCH Handbook in developing countries to protect the lives
and health of mothers and children around the world. Every year, one in seven newborn babies and their mothers
around the world use the MCH handbook (estimated based on the annual number of global births and the annual
number of MCH handbooks issued in the 2019 UNICEF White Paper on the World's Children).
//
Even before the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, countries had been engaged in fierce international
competition in the digital field and other areas, but the recent spread of the infection on a global scale has triggered
a major change in the world that could be called a paradigm shift/
//
Japan has long been promoting efforts to realize “Society 5.0”, driven by digitalization, but the spread of the
COVID-19 pandemic has made it clear that Japan is lagging behind other countries in terms of social implementation,
especially in the administrative field. The realization of digitalization and Society 5.0 is a structural reform of the
economy and society itself, and it is essential to transform society as a whole, including the state of systems and
policies, and the state of organizations including government. In particular, competition for human resources in
these fields is intensifying worldwide, and there is an urgent need to develop human resources regardless of gender.
Moreover, with the advent of the digital society, it is necessary to create an environment in which women can be
fairly evaluated and play an active role. It is also essential to narrow the digital divide, and efforts in education and
local communities are required. Furthermore, it is necessary to recognize the gender and other biases that have the
accumulated in data sets and algorithms that serve as training resources for artificial intelligence (A.I.). New trends,
such as changes in public awareness and behavior that have emerged in the wake of the recent spread of infectious
diseases, should not be turned back but should instead be seen as opportunities for social change to solve the longstanding problems of declining birthrates and aging society, low value-added productivity, and the concentration of
resources in Tokyo. At the same time, it is important to realize a "new normal" by moving ahead with the
transformations that would normally take 10 years to complete in one fell swoop, in a way that anticipates the
future. 
//
While the use of advanced technologies such as A.I., the internet of things (IoT), and big data is being promoted,
Japan will move forward with building “Society 5.0”. The government is promoting "smart city" initiatives to solve
urban and regional issues by optimizing urban management through the use of advanced technologies, new
mobility services such as Mobility as a Service (MaaS), and public and private data in urban development, and by
improving the sophistication and efficiency of city life, urban activities, and the management and use of urban
infrastructure, and by optimizing the location of facilities, and building a data collaboration infrastructure. Through
these efforts, Japan is promoting the formation of diverse and sustainable cities and regions that enhance social,
economic, and environmental values, such as improving resident satisfaction, revitalizing industry, and realizing
green economies, the optimal use of resources, and harmony with nature.
//
Since FY2017, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (MIC) has been promoting the construction
of data-driven smart cities through subsidies for the development of urban operating systems. From FY2019, the
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (MLIT) has been selecting and supporting pioneering
initiatives as smart city model projects and has been working on the horizontal deployment of knowledge and
experience gained in the model projects. In addition, since the same fiscal year, the MLIT been providing support
for the development of infrastructure, such as the introduction of on-demand transportation, cashless payment,
and data processing by transportation companies, in addition to pilot initiatives demonstrating MaaS. The necessary
budget support for initiatives for the verification and implementation of smart cities in each region is secured
regardless of the decrease in the total amount of science and technology-related expenses, and support is being
provided in cooperation and coordination among related ministries and agencies. In addition, the Cabinet Office
has developed a reference architecture, which is a standard design concept for smart cities, and is using it in the
development of smart cities in various regions to promote the development of smart cities with interconnectivity
and scalability. Based on the knowledge gained from these efforts, the Cabinet Office, the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and Communications, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, and the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure,
Transport and Tourism jointly prepared the "Smart City Guidebook" in April 2021, which is being used in the
construction of smart cities nationwide.
//
In addition, one of the key measures in the “Infrastructure System Overseas Promotion Strategy 2025"
formulated in 2020 is to “promote quality infrastructure and co-creation with partner countries". Japan is working
to disseminate information and develop smart cities, MaaS, and other related systems overseas. In particular,
regarding ASEAN, at the 2nd ASEAN-Japan Smart Cities Network High-Level Meeting held on December 16, 2020,
Japan proposed High Quality Infrastructure the "Smart JAMP” (the Smart City supported by Japan-ASEAN Mutual
Partnership) support package for ASEAN countries, which was welcomed by 26 cities in 10 ASEAN countries.
//
In order to promote regional development with the SDGs as the driving force, as mentioned above, the
outstanding SDGs initiatives of local governments related to regional development are selected as "SDGs Future
Cities," and comprehensive support is provided to each city for planning and progress management, with advice
from the Cabinet Office, experts, and the task force of ministries, agencies and local governments related to SDGs.
Among the local governments selected as SDGs Future Cities, the government provide financial support to the
"Municipal SDGs Model Projects," which are particularly outstanding and leading initiatives, and form SDGs model
cases for local development. The government will continue to disseminate best practices and information
domestically and internationally. In addition, in order to promote the participation of private companies and other
entities in solving regional issues and to promote public-private partnerships, the "Platform for Public-Private
Partnerships for Local SDGs" was established, and activities such as matching projects and subcommittees are being
implemented. Furthermore, in order to form a self-sustaining virtuous cycle through "Local Creation SDGs Finance,"
local governments compiled and published the "Guidelines for Registration and Certification of Local Creation SDGs"
in October 2020 in order to develop a registration and certification system that recognizes the efforts of local
businesses and other entities working to solve regional issues.
//
In light of the enormous impact on local economies and lifestyles caused by the spread of the COVID-19
pandemic, the government will continue to support the efforts of local governments to create sustainable communities by rebuilding economic activities in response to the "new normal" and building crisis-resistant
economic structures in line with the principles of the SDGs for local development.
//
Sustainable tourism is important to realize a tourism region that is "good to live in and good to visit." Sustainable
tourism is promoted by holding symposiums in cooperation with international organizations to share information
on sustainable tourism management, including recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition,
the Headquarters for Sustainable Tourism Promotion, which is headed by the Commissioner of the Japan Tourism
Agency, released the report "Towards a Sustainable Tourism Advanced Country" in 2019. Since then, the government
has been strengthening its efforts to realize sustainable tourism by promoting the "Japan Sustainable Tourism
Standard for Destinations” (JSTS-D) based on international standards, which can contribute to effective tourist
destination management, selecting and supporting model districts for effective implementation of the guidelines,
and promoting measures against congestion and violation of etiquette by utilizing model projects. In addition, the
government is strengthening efforts to realize sustainable tourism, such as the "Project to Fully Enjoy National Parks",
which aims to revitalize local communities through a virtuous cycle of protection and utilization of national parks.
Moreover, the government is promoting the creation of sustainable tourist attractions, including decarbonization
and the reduction of plastic waste. In order to strengthen the response to tourism crises, including infectious
diseases, guidelines for municipalities and tourism businesses to introduce tourism crisis management have been
prepared.
//
In order to create an environment where all foreign visitors to Japan can travel comfortably and stress-free, the
government supports efforts by accommodation facilities to renovate guest rooms and common areas to make them
barrier-free and promotes barrier-free access to sightseeing spots that represent tourist destinations.
In addition, in order to create an environment where everyone can enjoy travel with peace of mind, the
government is working to strengthen the local acceptance system with the cooperation of local governments, NPOs,
and a wide range of other related parties, as well as to spread and promote universal tourism.
//
In Fukushima, which suffered tremendous damage from the nuclear disaster, the establishment of a new
international education and research center as a "core center for creative reconstruction" is being planned that will
aim to conduct research and development and human resource development essential for the creative
reconstruction of Fukushima, including the creation of new industries, by mobilizing wisdom from Japan and abroad.
In addition, the center will also aim to transmit and share our experiences and achievements with the world in
accordance with our international responsibility as a country that has experienced a nuclear disaster, and strengthen
Japan's industrial competitiveness and create innovations that contribute to solving issues common to Japan and
the world, based on the knowledge gained from those activities. 
//
Specifically, while also targeting basic research, the center will address issues that have been difficult to solve
due to the vertical divisions in research conducted in existing facilities, by integrating technologies and methods in
an interdisciplinary manner, and by realizing social implementation and industrialization of research results through
joint efforts by industry, academia, and government, which will lead to the transformation of industrial structures
and social systems. In addition, the center will provide human resource development for graduate students, primary,
middle, and high school students, local companies, etc., as well as gather and develop human resources which
conduct R&D and verification by utilizing the world’s most advanced human resources in other research institutions,
in cooperation with such institutions. The basic concept for the new center is scheduled to be formulated in FY2021
//
The city of Maizuru, Kyoto Prefecture, is promoting the implementation of "Maizuru's version of Society 5.0,"
which is designed to connect and effectively utilize energy, transportation, daily life (matching and cashless), and
the public (infrastructure and human monitoring) by actively introducing advanced technologies such as A.I. and ICT
in cooperation with companies and educational institutions. The project is involved in pilot projects for the
introduction of symbiotic MaaS and monitoring of the implementation of ICT-based disaster prevention and
mitigation systems, aiming to realize a sustainable region where people, goods, information, and all other resources
are connected.
//
Science, technology, and innovation (STI) are fundamental elements of peace and prosperity by supporting
economic and social development and playing important roles in ensuring safety and security. For this reason, the
Sixth Science and Technology Innovation Basic Plan formulated in March 2021 states that it is important for Japan
to be actively involved in international collaboration and cooperation by utilizing STI’s potential to solve global-scale
issues. In this plan, Japan has set (1) addressing global climate change, and (2) addressing biodiversity, as key policy
issues and has decided to focus on research and development of those issues. Japan contributes to the development
of STI in Japan and the world, the enhancement of relations with other countries, the peace and stability of the
international community, and the resolution of global issues through the promotion of "science and technology
diplomacy" by utilizing its outstanding science and technology/
//
In developing regions such as Africa, the improvement of malnutrition and income has become an issue. For this
reason, Japan is conducting joint research with the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
(CGIAR) to improve the nutrition and added value of legumes and yams, and to develop rice lines with good taste
and high nutrition that meet market needs. By improving the breeding infrastructure for these major crops and
developing new varieties with enhanced nutrition, Japan will contribute to the food, agriculture, forestry, and
fisheries industries in developing regions.
//
The G20 Osaka Summit in June 2019 affirmed the importance of STI and the need for effective engagement of
various stakeholders, including governments, academia, research institutions, civil society, the private sector, and
international organizations, in harnessing the potential of STI. As an annex to the Osaka Leaders' Declaration, which
is the outcome document of the summit, the "Guiding Principles for the Development of Science, Technology, and
Innovation for SDGs Roadmaps” (STI for SDGs) prepared by the G20 Development Working Group was approved.
//
The Cabinet Office has been conducting research and analysis of the "STI for SDGs Platform," which aims to
match the needs of developing countries with Japan's science and technology seeds. As a part of this demonstration,
meetings with Kenya, a partner country in FY 2020, were held with the participation of stakeholders from both
countries in the agricultural and medical fields.
//
JICA has been working on open innovation to solve social development issues using STI in Kenya, Nigeria,
Uganda, and Rwanda in FY2019, and in Senegal, Ghana, Zambia, Tanzania, Mozambique, and Benin in FY2020. JICA
has provided Proof of Concept (PoC) opportunities for effective technical guidance using remote communication
technology such as smart glasses even under travel restrictions due to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
//
Through collaboration between Japan's science and technology and ODA, international joint research that leads
to the solution of global-scale issues and future social implementation in the fields of environment, energy, disaster
prevention, biological resources, and infectious diseases is promoted based on the needs of developing countries.
In order to accelerate the social implementation of research results toward the achievement of the SDGs, Japan is
working with the governments of partner countries to build bridges for cooperation and collaboration with domestic
and international stakeholders. As of April 2021, 156 projects have been carried out in 52 countries, contributing to
the acceleration of social implementation of research results toward the achievement of the SDGs.
//
Based on the experience of many disasters in the past, Japan has been promoting "national resilience" to build
safe and secure national, regional, and economic structures that are both strong and flexible.
In international cooperation, the Government of Japan actively supports the development of quality
infrastructure that leads to quality growth in line with the economic and development strategies of each country
and region, based on the recognition that the development of quality infrastructure improves the lives of the people
who live there, stimulates domestic and regional economic activities, and is one of the important initiatives to
support the robust economic growth of each country.
//
Due to the geographical, topographical, and climatic characteristics of its land, Japan has been repeatedly hit
by various disasters. The larger the disaster, the more it seems to come just when we have forgotten about the
hazard. And each time it comes, we lose many precious lives and suffer enormous economic, social, and cultural
losses. However, the damage caused by a disaster differs greatly depending on the nature of the society that
welcomes it. It is important to face up again to various crises such as large-scale natural disasters, and to make
preparations for large-scale natural disasters from ordinary times while avoiding the repetition of ex post facto
measures, such as suffering tremendous damage after a major earthquake and spending a long period of time on
recovery and reconstruction each time.
//
“The Sendai Framework for Disaster Reduction 2015-2030” points out that women, children, and vulnerable
groups are particularly affected by large-scale disasters, and it is necessary to take into account the differences in
the impacts of disasters on women and men. In times of emergency, gender issues, such as the concentrated burden
of housework, childcare, and nursing care on women, as well as domestic violence, sexual assault, and gender-based
violence, are magnified and strengthened, reflecting the stereotyped perception of gender roles. This is the reason
why it is essential to include the perspective of gender equality in all measures taken at ordinary times
//
Based on the lessons learned from past large-scale natural disasters, including the Great East Japan Earthquake,
the Fundamental Plan for National Resilience formulated in 2014 decides to promote: (1) preventing loss of
human life by any means, (2) avoiding fatal damage and maintain important functions of the state and society, (3)
minimizing damage to property of the citizenry and public facilities, and (4) achieving swift recovery and
reconstruction. These are the basic objectives of building national resilience, which aims to create safe and secure
national lands, regions, and economic society that have strength and flexibility.
//
In order to cope with the increasing frequency and severity of disasters due to the effects of climate change,
the government is promoting sustainable "basin flood control" to mitigate the risk of drastic flooding. These
measures cover not just catchment and river areas, but rather the entire inundation area is considered as a single 
basin, and all parties in both hardware and software are involved in the basin as a whole, according to the
characteristics of the region.
//
In order to realize a safe and secure society that overcomes vulnerability to disasters and aging infrastructure,
and a vibrant society where people, goods, and information can come and go, the government is promoting
measures for the "construction of a safe, smart, and sustainable road transportation system" that connects people
and regions and builds road networks that create communities and towns.
//
In addition, it is important to promote the creation of sustainable and attractive communities by utilizing the
diverse functions of the natural environment in both hard and soft aspects of social infrastructure development and
land use, etc. Through the "Green Infrastructure Public-Private Partnership Platform" established in March 2020,
the government is accelerating the implementation of green infrastructures by using the knowledge and
technologies of various entities to promote the social diffusion of green infrastructures, conduct surveys and
research on technologies, and study funding methods, as well as by enhancing support for local governments and
private businesses.
//
In order to ensure the accuracy and efficiency of various surveying and location-based services, and to form a
sustainable and resilient national land, it is beneficial to maintain and disseminate the Global Geodetic Reference
Frame (GGRF), which represents the exact shape of the earth and its changes, as the public infrastructure that
provides accurate location information anywhere on the Earth. To this end, Japan, as a co-sponsor of the resolution
on the GGRF adopted by the UN General Assembly, is promoting the following efforts:
 Technology transfer to developing countries for the establishment and maintenance of the GGRF
 Participation in the Subcommittee on Geodesy of the United Nations Committee of Experts on
Global Geospatial Information Management (UN-GGIM)
 Support for the dissemination of the GGRF through internationally coordinated global integrated
geodetic observations and other activities necessary for the establishment and maintenance of the
GGRF
//
Based on the experience and lessons learned from the Kumamoto earthquake in 2016, the city is accelerating
the recovery process by strengthening disaster prevention capabilities (software) on a regional basis, including the
establishment of inclusive evacuation center management organizations, by strengthening urban infrastructure
(hardware) through the formation of sustainable and convenient public transportation networks and by
strengthening the urban infrastructure (hardware) to enable effective use of groundwater and renewable energy in
addition to revitalizing the local community. To date, the city has concluded a public-private partnership
agreement for the supply of electricity for electric vehicles and is stimulating the economy within the region through
local production and local consumption of energy.
//
In order for developing countries to achieve economic growth toward self-sustaining development, what is
essential is not merely quantitative economic growth but “quality growth” that is "inclusive" in that the effects of
growth prevail in whole society, and no one is left behind, "sustainable" in that it can be sustained in harmony with
society and the environment, "resilient" in that it can withstand and recover from various shocks such as economic
crises and natural disasters. These are issues that Japan has been striving to achieve in the postwar period, and
Japan provides assistance to developing countries to help them achieve “quality growth” based on its own
experience, knowledge, lessons learned, and technologies.
//
In order to achieve “quality growth”, infrastructure development (economic and social infrastructure), which is
the foundation for the development of developing countries, is indispensable. Investing in infrastructure, it is
important not only that the infrastructure itself be of high quality, easy to use, safe, and resistant to disasters, but
also that the infrastructure plan be based on the needs of the partner country. In line with the economic and
development strategies of partner countries, Japan promotes quality infrastructure development that leads to
“quality growth” in the countries and regions and trains human resources to maintain and operate quality
infrastructure. Promoting quality infrastructure development, truly useful for “quality growth” of developing
countries, including technology transfer and job creation, is one of Japan's strengths. For example, in order to
achieve sustainable development in ASEAN, it is critical to reduce economic disparities and achieve stable
development within the region while meeting the enormous demands for infrastructure within ASEAN. To this end,
Japan announced the "Initiatives on Overseas Loan and Investment for ASEAN" at the ASEAN-related Summit
Meeting in November 2019, and expressed its readiness to provide $1.2 billion in loans and loans to mobilize a total
of $3 billion in public and private funds over three years (2020-2022) in the areas of quality infrastructure, access to
finance, support for women, and green investment.
//
The first step toward investment in quality infrastructure, which is useful for “quality growth,” and a common
vision of the basic element of “quality infrastructure investment,” was the "G7 Ise-Shima Principles for Promoting
Quality Infrastructure Investment," endorsed at the G7 Ise-Shima Summit in 2016. At the G20 Osaka Summit in June
2019, the “G20 Principles for Quality Infrastructure Investment” was endorsed by G20 leaders, including emerging
donors, as a common strategic direction and aspiration for quality infrastructure investment in the future. In order
to solve development issues such as global growth, poverty, inequality, gender equality, and women's
empowerment, the Government of Japan will continue to disseminate to the international community as a whole
the “G20 Principles for Quality Infrastructure Investment, including the integration of environmental and social
considerations, and to promote to the international standardization and implementation of quality infrastructure
investment in cooperation with countries around the world including Asia and international organizations such as
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the World Bank.
//
In light of the increasing severity of road traffic accidents in the world in recent years, the Government of Japan
has been providing support for road traffic safety in developing countries. On the tangible side, the government has
provided support for road facilities (installation of sidewalks, signs, guardrails, etc.) and traffic control systems that
take into account road traffic safety through finaancial support. On the intangible side, the government has provided
support for traffic safety education and strengthened capacity in traffic regulation and enforcement through
technical cooperation projects and issue-specific training. In recent years, the government has been developing
projects and studies that contribute to road traffic safety based on proposals from the private sector.
//
In order to promote reliable, safe, and environmentally friendly public transportation (urban railways s and
buses) in developing countries, Japan has provided support for planning and construction of urban railways,
improvement of public transportation policies, human resource development for operation and maintenance of
railways and buses, safety management, and introduction of IC cards.
//
In Delhi, India, where urbanization is advancing due to economic growth, road congestion and air pollution
caused by vehicle exhaust are serious problems. Japan has been cooperating in the establishment of the Delhi Metro
since the planning stage in 1995. The Delhi Metro started its operation in 2002 and is now firmly established as a
means of transportation for citizens (2 million people use it every day), contributing to reducing traffic congestion
and air pollution. In addition, Japanese know-how has been adopted in such areas as superior energy-saving and
safety technologies, the introduction of brightly lit cars and women-only cars, and the design of wheelchairaccessible stations. 
//
These efforts are also contributing to gender equality and other issues.
The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) is making efforts to create a
comfortable working environment for women. It has set up dormitories for
female employees, daycare centers for employees, separate rest areas for
men and women, and is promoting a maternity leave system. DMRC has
also made it compulsory for all employees to attend gender sensitivity
training and established a committee to deal with sexual harassment. The
activities of female station attendants, operators, etc., have broken down
stereotypes about occupational gender and have served as an opportunity
to change people's perceptions. As a result, the project is contributing to
the advancement of women in India.
//
Japan and ASEAN have confirmed that they will pursue specific cooperation projects on the SDGs, one of the
major areas of cooperation in the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP). Based on the Master Plan on ASEAN
Connectivity (MPAC) 2025 and the ACMECS Master Plan, Japan has been consistently supporting ASEAN's efforts to
strengthen connectivity in order to reduce intra-ASEAN disparities and promote deeper integration of the ASEAN
Community. On the occasion of the Japan-ASEAN Summit Meeting in November 2020, the Japan-ASEAN
Connectivity Initiative was launched, focusing on the quality infrastructure projects currently under implementation,
totaling about 2 trillion yen. The Initiative aims to strengthen connectivity through land, sea, and air corridors
through infrastructure development, together with human resource development of 1000 individuals who will
contribute to strengthening connectivity over the next three years.
In addition, under the auspices of the Japan-ASEAN Integration Fund (JAIF), ASEAN SDGs Frontrunner Cities
Programme was carried out with the aim of helping ASEAN cities achieve inclusive, sustainable, resilient, and
dynamic development in line with the ASEAN Vision 2020 by aligning city actions with the SDGs. By December 2020,
the program had supported a total of 24 participating cities, including 12 candidate cities and 12 front runner
candidate cities in 8 ASEAN countries (excluding Singapore and Brunei).
//
In order to expand the development of overseas water infrastructure, Japan is supporting the introduction of
quality Japanese water infrastructure-related facilities and the expansion of business investment from Japanese
companies by conducting feasibility studies (F/S), public-private missions, policy dialogues with partner countries,
and invitation projects for important persons.
Since June 2019, the government has been supporting a public-private platform consisting of companies,
industry associations, and local governments involved in overseas water business, dispatching missions, conducting
bilateral business seminars and matching events, and contributing to the improvement of water conditions in Asian
countries. And in March 2021, the government published the "Survey Report on the Overseas Development of the
Water Business: Ten-Year Review of Overseas Development Measures and Future Direction of Development", which
summarizes the new direction of overseas development of water infrastructure.
//
Every year, 200 million people worldwide are affected by natural disasters (90% of the victims are citizens of
developing countries), and the annual average economic loss due to natural disasters is about 140 billion dollars,
according to estimates by the United Nations Disaster Reduction Organization. Disaster risk reduction (DRR) efforts
are essential for eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable development.
Japan promotes strongly international cooperation in various fields of disaster-prevention by taking advantage
of its know-how accumulated through Japan’s experience with a number of disasters. In March 2015, Japan hosted
the 3rd United Nations World Conference on Disaster Reduction in Sendai and led the adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Reduction, which defines the international community's efforts in the field of disaster
reduction for the next 15 years. 
//
Japan has also made its own contributions to the world in the area of DRR, including leading the mainstreaming
of the DRR perspective into development policies. It announced the "Sendai Cooperation Initiative for Disaster Risk
Reduction" with the goal of providing a total of 4 billion dollars in cooperation and training a total of 40,000 human
resources over the four years from 2015 to 2018. Based on the achievement of these goals, the “Sendai Cooperation
Initiative for Disaster Risk Reduction Phase 2” was announced in June 2019, which will provide assistance to at least
5 million people through flood control and other measures between 2019 and 2022.
//
Furthermore, in conjunction with World Tsunami Awareness Day (November 5), which was proposed by Japan
and established unanimously at the 70th United Nations General Assembly in December 2015, Japan has been
holding the High School Student Summit on “World Tsunami Awareness Day" every year since 2016, inviting high
school students from around the world to learn about Japan's tsunami history, earthquake reconstruction, and
preparations for the Nankai Trough Earthquake.
In August 2019, the Japan International Public-Private Association for Disaster Risk Reduction (JIPAD) was
established to promote the overseas deployment of Japan's disaster prevention technologies in cooperation with
the public and private sectors, and to take the lead in improving the disaster prevention capacity of countries around
the world. From October 2019 to February 2020, JIPAD held a total of 14 "Public-Private Association for Disaster
Risk Reduction (JIPAD) Disaster Prevention Seminars" to introduce Japan's disaster prevention policies, technologies,
and know-how in an integrated manner to overseas countries. As of the end of November 2020, JIPAD had 196
member companies and organizations in various fields interested in the overseas development of disaster
prevention technologies.
//
The United Nations resolution "International Decade for Action: Water for Sustainable Development, 2018-
2028," (A/RES/71/222) of December 2016, emphasizes the importance of DRR in the realization of the water-related
goals of the SDGs. Japan has been leading the "Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction" to incorporate the
perspective of disaster risk reduction into development policies by working continuously and enthusiastically on the
effort with United Nation and other international agencies. In addition, since the impacts of climate change are
often manifested in the form of water-related disasters, it has been emphasizing disaster risk reduction efforts as a
means of adapting to climate change.
//
For example, at the 4th UN Special Thematic Session on Water and Disasters held at UN Headquarters in June
2019, the importance of investment on ex-ante disaster risk reduction and lessons learned from past disasters were
explained, and Japan's efforts to contribute to solving global problems related to water and disaster were
disseminated. At the HLPF side event in July 2020, Japan announced that it would contribute to the achievement of
the SDGs through "River Basin Disaster Resilience and Sustainability by all," in which all stakeholders in the basin
work together to promote flood control, and at the Climate Adaptation Summit hosted by the Netherlands in January 2021, Japan promoted "River Basin Disaster Resilience and Sustainability by all" as a drastic water-related
disaster countermeasure that takes into account the increase in rainfall due to climate change on the premise of
the “Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction”. It also emphasized the importance of building a safe and secure
society by taking into account the effects of climate change in basin planning. Furthermore, at the "UN High-Level
Meeting on the Implementation of the Water-Related Goals and Targets of the 2030 Agenda" hosted by the
President of the UN General Assembly in March 2021, Japan emphasized the importance of not only SDG 6, which
is a water and sanitation-related target, but also the follow-up to SDG Target 11.5, which aims to reduce the damage
caused by disasters, and announced its contribution to the necessary progress management. With continuing and
deepening those efforts, Japan promotes sharing its actions and know-how in the field of disaster-prevention.
//
In cooperation with the Asian Disaster Reduction Center (ADRC), Japan has been promoting activities such as
sharing of disaster information with 31 member countries, human resource development, and holding the Asian
Conference on Disaster Reduction. Japan will continue to promote the "mainstreaming of disaster reduction" by
sharing experiences and lessons learned from disasters with the rest of the world and introducing the perspective
of disaster reduction into the policies of each country.
//
In order to realize a sustainable society, Japan set itself a challenge to become “carbon neutral by 2050", which
means that it will reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050 and is promoting various initiatives to
achieve this goal. In addition, in order to contribute to the decarbonization of the world, Japan is actively supporting
the efforts of developing countries in energy efficiency and renewable energy, as well as supporting measures to
adapt to climate change, such as disaster risk reduction.
//
In order to build a recycling-oriented society, the government is promoting the 3Rs (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle) in
Japan based on the Basic Plan for Establishing a Recycling-Oriented Society. In addition, in the area of international
cooperation, in addition to supporting the development of high-quality infrastructure, we support the
establishment of a recycling-oriented society in developing countries by sharing knowledge on waste management
and the 3Rs.
// 
In October 2020, the Japanese government announced the Carbon Neutrality in 2050. Gone are the days when
countermeasures to global warming are considered as a cost or constraint to the economic growth, the world has
entered a new era to grasp them as a great opportunity for further prosperity. Changing the conventional ways of
thinking and taking proactive measures will bring about changes in industrial structures and society and the
economy which will lead to future growth. Industrial policies that create a "virtuous cycle of the economy and the
environment" are necessary. There are many companies in the industrial world that need to fundamentally change
their existing business models and strategies, and they are actually beginning to change their R&D and management
policies. This transformation is also an opportunity to lead the way in a new era. In December 2020, the Japanese
government formulated the "Green Growth Strategy for Carbon Neutrality in 2050" and June 2021 further
crystalized it in order to support the positive challenges of private companies to make bold investments and bring
about innovations, by setting high goals, presenting as concrete a vision as possible, and promoting measures to
support the efforts of companies.
//
Furthermore, at the Global Warming Prevention Headquarters and the Leaders Summit on Climate held in April
2021, Prime Minister Suga declared, "Japan aims to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 46 percent in fiscal year
2030 from its fiscal year 2013 levels, setting an ambitious target which is aligned with the long-term goal of achieving
net-zero by 2050. Furthermore, Japan will continue strenuous efforts in its challenge to meet the lofty goal of cutting
its emission by 50 percent." (Revised Law Concerning the Promotion of the Measures to Cope with Global Warming)
//
In May 2021, the revision of the Act on Promotion of Global Warming Countermeasures was enacted. The three
main points of the revised Act are as follows: (1) Establishment of new basic principles in promoting global warming
countermeasures. In its basic principles, the law now clearly states the realization of decarbonized society in Japan
by 2050. It also places "the citizens" at the top of the list that enumerates “the parties involved”, making this
principle an unprecedented one. (2) Establishment of a system whereby municipalities can certify projects that
contribute to the decarbonization of the region, as well as to the resolution of regional issues, by utilizing local
renewable energy sources. At the same time, it introduces special measures to such projects, such as a one-stop
system for related administrative procedures to facilitate smooth consensus building in the region and promote the
introduction of renewable energy that contribute to the region. (3) Regarding the greenhouse gas emission
calculation report publication system of companies, it will be promoted the digitization and open data of this system
and efforts for decarbonization management by making the reporting by electronic system in principle and making
it public without the procedure of requesting disclosure.
//
In December 2020, the Government of Japan established the “Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance”, comprising
members from industry, finance, academia, and other fields, to discuss issues and measures for sustainable finance
in Japan, with a view to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050. In addition, in order to promote disclosure of climaterelated risks and opportunities for companies and investors, we are promoting disclosure initiatives based on the
TCFD recommendations. For example, the "TCFD Summit" was held in 2019 and its second meeting in October 2020
was to stimulate discussions on promoting the TCFD-based disclosure. Moreover, the Corporate Governance Code,
which has been revised in June 2021, requires companies listed on the Prime Market of the Tokyo Stock Exchange
to enhance the quality and quantity of disclosure based on the TCFD recommendations or equivalent international
frameworks.
//
In order to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, the number of "zero carbon cities," which are municipalities that
have declared a target to achieve "virtually zero CO2 emissions by 2050," has increased from four cities in September
2019 to 400 cities in June 2021, and the population has already exceeded 100 million. The government is supporting
the efforts of local governments, including zero-carbon cities, to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions in
their regions while promoting local production for local consumption of energy and building resilient communities.
//
In addition, at the Council for National and Local Decarbonization, which has been held since December 2020,
the national and local governments collaborated to discuss key areas closely related to local initiatives and people's
lifestyles and adopted the “Regional Decarbonization Roadmap” in June 2021. The next five years will be an intensive
period to promote a "decarbonization domino effect," in which the latest applicable technologies will be
implemented in regions, and model cases of decarbonization will be created in each region, and the leading regions
will be expanded one after another. Going forward, Japan will intensively promote national support with a goal of creating at least 100 decarbonized leading areas by 2030. Specifically, the government will establish a scheme to
provide proactive, continuous, and comprehensive support for regional decarbonization efforts in terms of (1)
human resource dispatch and training, (2) information and know-how, and (3) financial resources.
//
In order to realize a sustainable society, consumers, businesses, and government must cooperate and
collaborate. It is important to have a system in which businesses that focus on social issues are properly understood,
evaluated, and encouraged by consumers in the market economy, thereby increasing their corporate value.
The government, in cooperation with consumer and business groups, is promoting businesses to listen to the
voices of consumers and to work collaboratively with consumers to address social issues. In addition to promoting
the "Voluntary Declaration on Consumer Orientation and Follow-up Activities" in order to inform society of the
efforts of businesses based on the philosophy of consumer-oriented management, since FY2018, we have been
awarding businesses that have made outstanding efforts in consumer-oriented management and held the third
award ceremony in March 2021.
//
In order to realize a sustainable society, it is essential for consumers to be aware of their influence on society
and to practice ethical consumption, which is consumption behavior that takes into consideration people, society,
and the environment, including regional revitalization and employment. In order to popularize and raise awareness
of ethical consumption, we have been working on the "Ethical Lab," an awareness-raising event co-hosted by local
governments, and hands-on workshops. In addition, through the creation and dissemination of pamphlets, posters,
videos, and educational materials that can be used in schools, as well as the introduction of advanced case studies
through a special website, we are working to convey the great possibility that each individual's consumption
behavior can “change the future of the world”.
//
The amount of food loss and waste in Japan is estimated to be 6 million tons per year (fiscal year 2018), and
roughly equal amounts are generated from both households and food business operators. In order to reduce the
amount of food loss and waste, it is important for various entities such as the national and local governments,
businesses, and consumers to address this issue from their respective standpoints, and for society as a whole to
respond.
//
In October 2019, the Act on Promotion of Food Loss and Waste Reduction was enacted, and in March 2020, the
Cabinet approved the Basic Policy on Promotion of Food Loss and Waste Reduction. Based on these, various
activities are being promoted in cooperation with related ministries and agencies.
The policy states that it is important to view the problem of food loss and waste not as "someone else's
problem" but as "our own problem" and to take action. The role of consumers is to "consider and take possible
action which each one of us can do to reduce food loss and waste in our daily lives". The government is facilitating
awareness-raising by distributing leaflets with information on what we can do in our daily lives, raising awareness
intensively during Food Loss and Waste Reduction Month (every October), and disseminating information on its
websites. 
//
In recent years, the agriculture, forestry, fisheries and food industries have been faced with many challenges, such
as global warming and the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Under these circumstances, many industries and
international policy discussions are placing greater emphasis on addressing the SDGs and environmental issues, and
Japan's agriculture, forestry, fisheries and food industries are required to respond appropriately. In addition, since
it is necessary for Japan to consider a new food system from the standpoint of the Asian monsoon region in
international discussions, it is an urgent need to build a sustainable food system with an eye on the future of
agriculture, forestry and fisheries and the region. For this reason, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
(MAFF) formulated the "Strategy for Sustainable Food Systems, “MeaDRI (Measures for achievement of
Decarbonization and Resilience with Innovation)” " in May 2021 to enhance both productivity potential and
sustainability of the agriculture, forestry, fisheries and food industries through innovation.
//
By 2050, we aim to achieve zero CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries,
50% reduction in risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides, 30% reduction in chemical fertilizers use, increase in
organic farming to 1 million hectare （equivalent to 25% of farmland）, sustainable sourcing for imported materials
by 2030. In order to achieve these goals, the government will promote initiatives at each stage of food systems, as
well as innovations to reduce environmental load, from a medium- to long-term perspective.
//
In September 2021, the United Nations will hold the Food Systems Summit to discuss sustainability of food
systems. At this summit, Japan plans to contribute to an international discussion by introducing the "Strategy for
Sustainable Food Systems" that promotes sustainable food industries, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries in line with
the actual climate.
//
The Act for Partial Revision of the Fishery Act was enacted in December 2020 with the newly established goal
to achieve the Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) based on the results of scientific stock assessment in line with the
Roadmap for Promoting the New Fisheries Management System. It also aims to recover the fisheries production to
the level of FY2010 (4.44 million tons) by FY2030, by introducing the new fisheries management system based on
output control. In the aquaculture industry, we will also contribute to reducing the burden of fish farming on the
ground environment and natural resources through the development and dissemination of artificially-hatched seed
production technology and alternative materials to fishmeal.
//
Since the conclusion of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent Illegal Fishing in May 2017, Japan has
been lobbying countries that have not yet signed the agreement to do so. In addition, Japan continues to make
consistent contributions to the promotion of the Rule of Law and sustainable resource management in the field of
fisheries, including the conclusion of the Agreement on the Prevention of Unregulated High Seas Fishing in the
Central Arctic Ocean in July 2019. In addition, in order to eradicate illegal fishing by foreign fishing vessels, the
Government of Japan enacted the Law for the Proper Distribution of Fisheries in December 2020, which removes
illegally harvested aquatic animals and plants from distribution. Moreover, in addition to its existing efforts to
resource management of tuna and bottom fish resources, it is leading international resource management efforts
for Pacific saury and eel, further contributing to the preservation of biodiversity.
//
In collaboration with various stakeholders both inside and outside the region, the city of Maniwa, Okayama
Prefecture has been improving its energy self-sufficiency ratio by promoting woody biomass power generation and
promoting the use of cross laminated timber (CLT) and other materials to increase demand for wood. Furthermore,
by utilizing its accumulated know-how, the city is developing and promoting resource-recycling agriculture in
satoyama and satoumi (locally managed montane and coastal ecosystems near villages, respectively) using bioliquid fertilizer and oyster shells and is aiming to establish a new regional economic structure by involving citizens
and utilizing local resources.
//
Based on the "Actions for a Cool Earth” (ACE 2.0) announced at the COP21 in 2015, Japan has been providing
various kinds of assistance to developing countries in Asia, Oceania, Africa, and Latin America. As an example of
such support, we have dispatched experts on climate change for capacity building to Pacific Island countries that
are vulnerable to disasters and have also contributed to the introduction of renewable energy in each region.
//
Japan supports countries vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, contributing maximum $3 billion to the
Green Climate Fund (GCF) where Japan is the second largest donor. 159 projects have been approved as GCF projects
and most of them are under implementation as of December 2020. The approved projects are expected to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 1.2 billion tons and benefit 410 million people by supporting adaptation measures.
//
In addition, through the Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM), in which Japan cooperates with developing countries
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and share the emission reductions achieved, approximately 190 decarbonizing
and low-carbon projects have been implemented in 17 countries. Through the JCM, we expect accumulated
emission reductions or removals by FY2030 ranging from 50 to 100 million tons, and we currently expect to reduce
more than 17 million tons by FY2030 through approximately 180 projects. With regard to contributing to the SDGs
from the JCM, we have prepared a report that summarizes specific examples of contributions to each of the SDGs’
targets through the projects of the JCM Model Project. In addition, the "Guidelines on Gender Equality for the Joint Crediting Mechanism (JSM)" have been formulated to promote gender equality among the project stakeholders,
especially the representative and joint project partners.
//
Moreover, Japan is promoting decarbonization in developing countries through the "City-to-City Collaboration
Programme," which utilizes cooperation between domestic and overseas cities through memorandums of
understanding on environmental cooperation and sister city agreements to share experiences and know-how in
forming a decarbonized and low-carbon society.
//
Through this project, the private sector organizes a consortium that includes both domestic and overseas cities
and aims to support the formation of decarbonization projects and the establishment of institutional infrastructure
in overseas cities, as well as the horizontal development of good practices. Based on Japan's high-quality
decarbonization and low-carbon technologies, the project aims to create mutually beneficial innovations (coinnovations) through collaboration between Japan and developing countries, and to promote the return to domestic
technological development and the spread of Japan's low-carbon and decarbonization technologies to developing
countries. So far, 14 projects have been adopted in 2018, 17 in 2019, 20 in 2020, and 21 in 2021, with 165local
governments in Japan and 39 cities in 13 countries and regions around the world currently participating. We
supported 8 R & D and demonstration projects aimed at creating co-innovation in 2019 and 5 in 2020.
//
In addition, the Ministry of the Environment (MOE), together with the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), hosted an "online platform" ministerial meeting on recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic, climate change, and environmental measures in September 2020. Chaired by Mr. Koizumi, Minister of
the Environment, 46 ministers and deputy ministers from various countries spoke at the meeting, which eventually
attracted a total of 96 countries, making it the largest online international conference on climate change in the world
to date. The conference confirmed the importance of redesigning society to achieve three transitions: transition to
a decarbonized society, transition to a circular economy, and transition to a decentralized society. In March 2021,
the Ministry of the Environment held the International Forum on Decarbonizing Cities online in cooperation with
the UNFCCC, with the aim of accelerating urban efforts toward decarbonization worldwide. At the forum, we
confirmed the importance of decarbonization policies of cities that are directly linked to communities as well as the
support of central governments and international organizations and confirmed that we will be expanding a series
of "decarbonization domino effects" around the world by spreading the advanced efforts of cities.
//
Japan's Prime Minister Suga attended the G7 Summit held in June 2021.The G7 leaders concurred on achieving
an overwhelming decarbonized domestic power system in the 2030s and phasing-out new direct government
support for international carbon-intensive fossil fuel energy as soon as possible, with limited exceptions.
Domestically, consistent with NDCs and net-zero commitments, the G7 leaders concurred on rapidly scaling up
technologies and policies that further accelerate the transition away from unabated coal capacity. The G7 leaders also committed to end new direct government support for unabated international thermal coal power generation
by the end of this year.
//
Prime Minister Suga emphasized that climate change measures have been a top priority in his administration
and demonstrated his determination to realize carbon neutrality by 2050, and to promote innovation utilizing
Japan's technological capabilities, as well as efforts at local levels. He also stressed the importance for non-G7 major
emitters to make further efforts in addition to ambitious goals set by developed nations. In this regards, Prime
Minister Suga announced that Japan will comprehensively support developing countries for realistic transitions
toward a decarbonized society by utilizing various energy sources and technologies according to each country’s
circumstances. Furthermore, Prime Minister Suga announced that, as G7 should fully support developing countries
that need assistance, Japan will provide climate finance totaling 6.5 trillion yen over the next five-years, from 2021
to 2025, and it will further enhance its assistance for adaptation. The G7 has committed to increasing and improving
their overall international public climate finance contributions by 2025.
//
Through the Act on Plastic Resource Circulation, which passed the Diet in June 2021, and other measures, we
will promote efforts to circulate resources throughout the entire life cycle of plastic products, from design,
manufacturing, and disposal after use, and realize the transition to a circular economy.
In addition, we will steadily promote Japan's transition to a circular economy through public-private partnership
between Keidanren (the Japan Business Federation) and the government. Furthermore, based on the outcome of
the G7 Climate and Environment Ministers' Meeting, we will develop the "Circular Economy and Resource Efficiency
Principles” (CEREP) as a set of norms for global corporations and the financial community, in cooperation with the
G7 countries to accelerate green growth throughout the world as a whole.
//
Our modern economy and society are built on the foundation of a stable and prosperous environment. However,
the increase in human activity is placing a heavy burden on the global environment, manifesting itself as
environmental problems, and affecting our lives in various ways. In order to achieve sustainable development, it is
important to promote the sustainable use of both marine resources and terrestrial resources. There is an urgent
need to promote the conservation of biodiversity, which is the foundation of society and the economy, and to
maintain and improve the ecosystem services provided by the natural environment, such as forests, rivers, and
oceans.
//
Marine litter, including plastic, causes various problems such as the deterioration of marine ecosystems,
degradation of coastal functions, adverse effects on the landscape, obstruction of ship navigation, and impacts on
fisheries and tourism. In May 2019, Japan formulated the “National Action Plan for Marine Plastic Litter” and the
“Resource Circulation Strategy for Plastics”. In addition, the basic policy based on the Act on the Promoting the
Treatment of Marine debris was changed to curb the generation of litter and collect drifting and seabed litter
through the formation of a recycling-based society. In pursuit of the reduction of the marine plastic litter caused by
ships, Japan is engaged in activities to understand the actual conditions, provide guidance and raise awareness. Also,
in accordance with the Law Relating to the Prevention of Marine Pollution and Maritime Disaster, Japan has
promoted the prevention of pollution by oil, hazardous liquid substances, wastes, and exhaust gases caused by ships
and the destruction of ecosystems by the transboundary movement of aquatic organisms in order to preserve the
marine environment. Moreover, Japan has actively participated in the deliberations of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) on new environmental regulations.
//
In addition, in FY2019, a study group on SDG14 was held at the Councilors' Meeting of the Headquarters for
Ocean Policy. The results of the study group, summarized as "Promotion of the SDGs, including SDG 14, through the
creation of a 'Japanese model'", were included in the recommendations submitted by the Councilors' Metting in
June 2020 to the Prime Minister, who is the Director-General of the Headquarters, recommending the promotion
of the SDGs to the government. The report of the above study group was also shared with overseas stakeholders at
international conferences related to the ocean (APEC Ocean and Fisheries Working Group (OFWG), etc.), and
disseminated as Japan's initiatives.
//
As Japan's forest resources are entering a period of full-scale use, in addition to appropriate thinning, the
establishment of a forest resource cycle of "harvest, use, plant" will ensure the sustainable fulfillment of the multiple
functions of forests and enhance their economic, social, and environmental benefits. For this reason, we are promoting the growth of the forestry industry for the recycling of resources, the promotion of public management
in forests that are not suitable for forestry management, and the appropriate implementation of monitoring of
forest resources.
//
Aiming at regional revitalization with forestry as its mainstay, the village of Nishiawakura, Okayama Prefecture
aims to maximize and optimize the forest value of the entire region by consolidating forests through forest trust
projects and converting privately owned forests that are not suitable for forest management into publicly owned
forests after assessing their economic value. In order to raise funds, a forest fund is being set up, and public-private
partnerships, including those with financial institutions, are being promoted by positioning investors as a relevant
population and involving them in the project.
//
At the G20 Osaka Summit in June 2019, we shared the "Osaka Blue Ocean Vision" with other countries, which
aims to reduce additional pollution from marine plastic litter to zero by 2050 and agreed on the "G20 Framework
for Actions on Marine Plastic Litter" to realize the vision. At the same time, Japan announced the "MARINE Initiative"
to support capacity building and infrastructure development for waste management in developing countries. In
addition to provide training for 10,000 officials engaging in waste management all over the world by 2025, in
cooperation with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and other international organizations, Japan
is supporting the accumulation of scientific knowledge and the development of models for the prevention of marine
plastic waste spills, as well as supporting environmentally appropriate plastic waste management and disposal
technologies in Asia.
//
In addition, since there is an international demand for appropriate
management of marine resources, in Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) in the Pacific, Caribbean, and Indian Oceans, Japan is promoting
the sustainable use of marine resources, one of the few important
resources for development of those countries. 
//
Japan, for example, has introduced the concept of “satoumi” (locally managed coastal ecosystems near villages)
and has been working to increase economic benefits such as revitalizing local economies by building food value
chains through the sustainable use of marine resources and contributing to the sixth industry and tourism together
with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG, a
regional international organization), the University of the South Pacific (USP), the Pacific Community (SPC), and the
Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism (CRFM).
//
In addition, in response to the oil spill accident caused by the bulk carrier WAKASHIO, which ran aground off
the coast of the Republic of Mauritius on Saturday, July 25, 2020, Japan dispatched the Japan Disaster Relief Team
and a team of experts three times at the request of the Mauritian government. In cooperation with the government
of Mauritius and experts from other countries and organizations, the team conducted various activities such as
surveying the oil spill situation along the coast of Mauritius, assisting in oil control operations, surveying marine
pollution, assessing mangroves, coral reefs, and bird nesting sites, and assisting in the formulation of a long-term
monitoring plan. Furthermore, we are promoting cooperation on an unprecedented scale from a rapid and mediumto long-term perspective in order to prevent maritime disasters and restore and boost the environment, fisheries,
and economy.
//
Based on a partnership agreement between JICA and JAXA created in 2016, JICA-JAXA Forest Early Warning
System in the Tropics (JJ-FAST) was developed by using data from JAXA's Advanced Land Observing Satellite (DAICHI2), and data from 77 countries was made public. The system has been used to develop human resources for forest
conservation, and technical cooperation/training using the system has been conducted in a total of 15 countries so
far. In addition, through contributions to the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), Japan has supported
the establishment of forest fire prevention and response systems and sustainable forest management systems in
tropical regions. Through these efforts, Japan is contributing to the conservation of tropical forests and, through
them, to climate change countermeasures and biodiversity conservation.
//
Furthermore, in order to contribute to the promotion of sustainable forest management internationally, we are
promoting REDD+ activities by private companies, etc., and supporting the spread of measures to enhance the
disaster risk reduction and mitigation functions of forests and to strengthen resilience of mountain watersheds in
developing countries by utilizing Japanese mountain management technologies.
//
The International Partnership for the Satoyama Initiative (Secretariat: United Nations University Institute for the
Advanced Study of Sustainability), where, as of March 2021, 271 organizations from 73 countries and regions
participate, was established at the COP10 to the Convention on Biological Diversity (2010, Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture)
to promote the activities of the Satoyama Initiative, which aims to realize societies in harmony with nature. In
collaboration with related international organizations, the partnership has implemented about 450 projects in about
40 countries and regions, including projects such as the development of jam and wine products in Uganda using
fruits unique to the region.
//
In addition, taking the opportunity of the COP15 to the Convention on Biological Diversity (scheduled for 2021
in Kunming, China), we will further promote the “Satoyama Initiative”, including the international development of
Japan's initiatives, and strengthen our efforts to implement the new global framework after 2020 (the post-2020
global biodiversity framework).
//
Some of the biodiversity-related targets in SDG 14 (marine resources) and SDG 15 (terrestrial resources) have a
target year of 2020, and no target has been set for 2030. Japan, seizing the opportunity of the inquiry on the post2020 global biodiversity framework held by the Convention on Biological Diversity in July 2020, submitted its opinion
that the post-2020 global biodiversity framework should take over the biodiversity-related targets of the SDGs and
that this should be included in the decision at COP15 to the Convention on Biological Diversity.
//
Prior to the G7 Summit held in June 2021, Japan endorsed the "Leaders' Pledge for Nature" in May 2021, which
commits to restore biodiversity by 2030. In addition, as a result of discussions on biodiversity at the G7 Summit, the
G7 adopted the "G7 -2030 Nature Compact" to support the global mission to halt and reverse biodiversity loss by
2030. In the Nature Compact, G7 committed to conserving or protecting at least 30% of its national land and ocean
by 2030 according to national circumstances and approaches, as well as to accelerate actions, based on the Osaka
Blue Ocean Vision, to tackle the increasing levels of plastic pollution in the ocean.
//
Japan has been conducting observation and research in Antarctica for more than 60 years and has been
continuously acquiring data on climate change. Based on the Third Basic Plan on Ocean Policy (approved by the
Cabinet in May 2018), Japan is promoting advanced research to understand the actual situation and processes of
environmental change in the Arctic region, and to improve and refine weather and climate forecasts. In addition, as
an international research platform for the Arctic region, we have conducted studies, research and development,
and basic design for the construction of an Arctic research vessel with icebreaking capabilities and capable of
observing the Arctic sea-ice areas and have decided to start construction in FY2021.
//
The Sanyo Girls' Junior and Senior High School was among the
first schools to focus on marine pollution in the Seto Inland Sea, such
as plastic waste and micro plastics, and collaborated with local
fishermen to collect and analyze marine debris. At the time of
collection, the school invited the media and junior and senior high
school students from neighboring prefectures to disseminate
information and learn.
//
In order to solve the marine litter problem, the school is conducting educational activities on marine litter in
inland and coastal areas, where marine litter originates, with an emphasis on reducing the amount of marine litter
generated as well as collecting marine litter. Through the collaboration of government, NPOs, and local media, the
project has become an ongoing effort rooted in the community.
//
However, changes in the balance of power in the international community are accelerating and becoming more
complex, and uncertainty surrounding the existing order is increasing. Under these circumstances, competition
between nations aiming to form an international order in their own favor and expand their influence is emerging.
Furthermore, in the international community, security issues are becoming broader and more diverse, making it
difficult for a single country to deal with them on its own. In the space area and cyber area, making international
rules is also an issue from the viewpoint of security. In the maritime domain, there have been cases of the unilateral
assertion of sovereign rights or actions based on territorial claims that are incompatible with the existing
international order, and situations have arisen in which the freedom of the high seas is unjustly infringed.
//
Under these circumstances, Japan needs to maintain its stance as a peaceful nation and contribute more
actively to ensuring the peace, stability, and prosperity of the international community from the standpoint of
‘positive pacifism’ based on the principle of international cooperation.
In Japan, there is no end to the number of crimes in which children and women are victims, and the number of
victims of fraud targeting the elderly continues to be serious. In order to realize a city where human rights are
guaranteed and where people can live safely and with peace of mind, it is important to take action in each
community.
//
As the socio-economic structure changes and the child-rearing functions of families and communities decline,
child abuse has become a serious problem. Bullying among children and corporal punishment by teachers remain
major problems. In addition, with the rapid development of information and communication technology (ICT),
children are becoming involved in crimes through the Internet. Furthermore, depending on the socio-economic
status of the parents, children may not be able to have sufficient educational opportunities. Creating a society where
each and every child, who will lead the next generation, can grow up healthy without any harmful effects on their
body and mind is an issue that we all share, and we need to take action.
//
Bullying should never be tolerated. Therefore, in order to prevent bullying before it occurs, and to realize early
detection and early response, the government in helping local governments to deal with the problem of bullying by
deploying more school counselors and school social workers, and by promoting the development of consultation
systems using SNS and other means.
In addition, in order to ensure that the prohibition of corporal punishment is thoroughly enforced, a survey on
the actual status of corporal punishment is conducted, and the content of notifications regarding the distinction between disciplinary measures and corporal punishment, as well as efforts to prevent corporal punishment, are
made known at meetings for those in charge of student guidance at prefectural boards of education.
//
Child Sexual Exploitation is an extremely malicious act that has a harmful effect on children's physical and
mental health and seriously infringes on their human rights and must not be tolerated. Therefore, based on the
Basic Plan on Measures against Child Sexual Exploitation, formulated by the Council of Ministers for Crime Control
and Prevention in April 2017, measures to prevent child sexual exploitation are being promoted in cooperation with
businesses and private organizations.
//
In addition, in light of the diversification of means of communication, in order to make it easier for children who
have been victims of human rights violations to access appropriate services, some Legal Affairs Bureaus have
established consultation services using SNS in FY2019. In Fiscal Year 2020 and beyond, the government is continuing
to develop a human rights counseling service using SNS and is working to strengthen measures to address children's
human rights issues, including bullying and abuse, by further publicizing the Human Rights Counseling Service.
When any suspected human rights violation is recognized through these measures, it is investigated as a human
rights violation case and efforts are made to remedy the damage in cooperation with schools and relevant
organizations.
//
In Japan, approximately 200 children under the age of 14 die every year due to unintentional accidents, such as
suffocation and drowning. In order to prevent such unintentional accidents among children as much as possible, the
following measures have been taken by cooperation of related ministries and agencies: (1) publication of warning
materials, issuance of "Twitter to Protect Children from Accidents," etc., and awareness-raising activities for parents
through distribution of the "Protect Children from Accidents! Handbook”etc ; and (2) conducting of surveys and
analyses of the actual situation and raising awareness of unintentional accidents involving children.
//
Sexual crimes, sexual violence, intimate partner violence, sexual harassment, and other forms of violence
against women are serious violations of human rights and must not be tolerated. With the evolution of information
and communication technology (ICT) and the spread of new communication tools such as social networking sites,
the forms of violence against women are becoming more diverse. In June 2019, the Act on Partial Revision of the
Child Welfare Act, to Strengthen Child Abuse Prevention Measures was enacted, including a partial revision of the
Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims, which was enacted in 2001, and Child
Guidance Centers were underlined in the law as relevant organizations that should coordinate and cooperate with
each other to ensure appropriate protection of victims of intimate partner violence, which is considered to be
closely related to child abuse.
//
In addition, in order to strengthen the support for victims of spousal violence, the Government of Japan
implements the Domestic Violence Consultation Plus and supports the advanced efforts of private shelters, etc.,
which play an important role in supporting victims. In June 2020, the Laison Conference of Relevant Ministries and Agencies for Enhancement of Measures against
Sexual Crimes and Sexual Assault adopted the "Policy on Enhancement of Measures against Sexual Crimes and
Sexual Assault" and designated the three-year period from FY2020 to FY2022 as the "period of intensive
strengthening" of measures against sexual offenses and sexual violence.
//
Supporting offender rehabilitation contributes to the realization of a society where "no one will be left behind”.
Based on "Act for the Prevention of Recidivism" (December 2016), the "Recidivism Prevention Plan" (December
2017), and the "Acceleration Plan for Recidivism Prevention Plan" (December 2019), etc., Japan is promoting
measures to prevent recidivism, such as enhancing and strengthening measures for persons released from prison
upon completion of their sentences, implementing effective guidance that is tailored to the individual attributes of
persons who have committed offenses, securing employment and housing, facilitating the use of healthcare and
welfare services, implementing educational support in cooperation with schools and others, strengthening
collaboration with local governments, and facilitating the activities of cooperating members of the private sector.
//
Having experienced the destruction caused by the atomic bomb, Hiroshima Prefecture is promoting efforts to
"realize a peaceful world without nuclear weapons”. By holding the World Business Council for International Peace,
the prefecture has deepened cooperation with multi-stakeholders, developed a platform for creating collaborative
peace initiatives, and is promoting awareness of the SDGs among businesses in the prefecture. Hiroshimaalso
provides opportunities for peace education to people around the world, especially to young people who will lead
the next generation, in order to develop human resources who can contribute to peace.
//
The Rule of Law, which recognizes the supremacy of law over all authority, is an essential foundation for a just
and equitable society within a country, as well as the basis for an international order consisting of friendly and equal
relations among nations. Furthermore, the Rule of Law is an important element in promoting peaceful resolution
of disputes between nations and in promoting "good governance" within nations. With this in mind, Japan has made
the strengthening of the Rule of Law one of the pillars of its foreign policy. Japan opposes unilateral attempts to
change the status quo by force, and works to preserve its territory, secure its maritime interests and economic
benefits, and protect its citizens. Japan is also promoting bilateral and multilateral rulemaking and its proper
implementation in various fields, including security, economic, social, and criminal affairs.
//
Through the United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, Japan has conducted international training courses and seminars on criminal justice and the treatment
of offenders for more than 6,000 criminal justice practitioners from 139 countries and regions, paying particular attention to the priority issues of the international community set forth in the SDGs, such as anti-corruption and
organized crime, and thereby contributed to developing the criminal justice systems in developing countries and to
building the capacity of criminal justice practitioners. In addition, in order to contribute to the establishment of the
Rule of Law and the creation of a foundation for sound economic development in each country, the Government of
Japan dispatches legal professionals as long-term experts to the target countries and invites relevant persons in the
field of legal and judicial affairs to Japan for training and holds seminars on the development of legal systems to
assist in the drafting and revision of laws and regulations in developing countries, the development of systems to
implement laws and regulations, the development of systems to improve access to justice, and the development of
human resources in the legal and judicial fields.
//
In March 2021, the United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (Kyoto Congress), the
largest UN conference on crime prevention and criminal justice, was held in Kyoto. The Kyoto Congress discussed
approaches in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice to achieve the SDGs and adopted the “Kyoto
Declaration” as its outcome document. The “Kyoto Declaration” outlines the commitment of each country to further
promote international cooperation in the field of criminal justice, multi-stakeholder partnerships, and the
promotion of the rule of law as a precondition for sustainable development. Japan will play a leading role in ensuring
the implementation of the “Kyoto Declaration” and will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs by proposing
and promoting the establishment of regional platforms to enhance cooperation in criminal justice and the creation
of UN standards and norms focusing on reducing reoffending through multi-stakeholder partnerships.
//
Japan has been participating in the “Global Partnership to End Violence against Children” (GPeVAC) since 2018
and is actively involved in the activities of GPeVAC as a "pathfinding country" working towards the elimination of
violence against children. As part of this effort, the “Roundtable to Ending Violence against Children”, which
comprises civil society, business, experts, and relevant government ministries and agencies, has been holding
concrete discussions on the formulation of Japan's “National Action Plan on Combating Violence against Children
(NAP)”. Recognizing the importance of listening to the opinions of children in the process of formulating the plan, a
"children's public opinion survey" was conducted. Currently, the government is working on the formulation of the
NAP through dialogue and cooperation among relevant government ministries and agencies, civil society, and other
stakeholders.
//
Japan has made efforts in collaboration with international organizations, NGOs and private companies to
eradicate the worst form of child labor in developing countries. For example, in January 2020, the "Platform for
Sustainable Cocoa in Developing Countries" was established in Japan with the aim of co-creating solutions to
development issues, including child labor, in the cocoa industry, and pilot activities for the establishment of a child
labor-free zone in Ghana have been conducted since October 2020 through JICA. Furthermore, in response to the
call by the ILO, which is leading the implementation of the “International Year for the Elimination of Child Labour”
(2021), the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) has announced that it will take initiatives to eliminate child labor in Asia, including Japan, as concrete actions that can be achieved by December 2021 (the 2021 Action
Pledge).
//
Sustainable development and sustained peace are two sides of the same coin, and the Government of Japan
has set forth the basic position that international cooperation in general should contribute to the "nation-building"
and "human development" of the world, based on the principle of human security. Accordingly, the government
has been steadily promoting international peace cooperation, emphasizing its contribution to "humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus" by providing seamless support.
//
Since the enforcement of the Act on Cooperation with United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and Other
Operations in 1992, Japan has dispatched and approximately 12,500 personnel to a total of 28 missions. As of April
2021, Japan has dispatched six Headquarters staff personnel: four to the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS) and two to the Multinational Force and Observers (MFO). In the past, engineer units
dispatched by Japan have been engaged in constructing roads and other infrastructure projects in the field, including
South Sudan. Japan’s engineering units constructed and repaired roads, which provided benefits to local
communities. It is regarded that road construction can improve access to humanitarian relief and promote various
kinds of social intercourse that form the basis of development, and it is also expected to promote understanding
and reconciliation among communities.
//
As for material contributions in kind, Japan has made 29 in-kind contributions based on the Act, and most
recently, in December 2019, Japan granted tents and other equipment to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which supports security sector reform (SSR) in the peace process of South Sudan, for
temporary accommodation of South Sudanese government and anti-government groups.
//
Building on its past activities and under the principle of "proactive contribution to peace", Japan will continue
to utilize its strengths to make more active contributions in the field of international peace cooperation, including
strengthening support for capacity building, deployment of troops and individuals, and material cooperation. Also,
through cooperation without gap among peace, humanitarian cooperation and development, Japan will implement
the “proactive contribution to peace” to contribute peace and stability of the international society.
//
Since 2015, Japan has been cooperating with the UN Triangular Partnership Project, a framework in which the
UN, Supporting Member States, and Troop Contributing Countries (TCCs) cooperate with each other to provide the
necessary trainings for personnel to be deployed to UN peacekeeping operations (PKOs) in order to support the
capacity building of prospective peacekeepers in countries participating in UN PKOs. Specifically, a total of 172 Japan
Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) instructors and other officials have been dispatched to Kenya and Uganda to provide trainings in heavy equipment operation to 277 personnel from eight African countries who have expressed their
intention to deploy facility units to UN PKOs. In 2018, this project was expanded to include Asia and its surrendering
regions, and a total of 68 JSDF instructors and other officials were dispatched to Vietnam to provide heavy
equipment operation trainings to 56 personnel from nine countries in Asia and its surrendering regions. In addition,
from October 2019, Japan began dispatching JSDF instructors (doctors) to the United Nations Field Medical
Assistance Course (UNFMAC) which was launched since the medical training was identified as one of the core
capabilities in current UNPKOs. 
//
Peacebuilding is important for the peace and stability of the international community, and Japan has positioned
peace and security as one of the priority issues in its "Development Cooperation Charter”. In responding to
humanitarian crises, it is effective to combine humanitarian assistance and development cooperation with
peacebuilding and conflict prevention, the so-called “Humanitarian, Peace and Development (HPD) Nexus”.
//
It is important to focus not only on post-conflict response, but also on preventing the outbreak and recurrence
of conflicts, which are causes of humanitarian crises, and to fundamentally address the root causes of conflicts,
through such means as nation-building and social stabilization from peacetime. In this regard, Japan is promoting
peacebuilding assistance by emphasizing this concept of HPD Nexus.
//
In fragile and conflict-affected states, Japan has been working to build trust between the government and the
population and among the population by providing inclusive administrative services and supporting the formation
of societies where coexistence is possible, focusing on local administrations that are closest to the population. For
example, in Mindanao, Philippines, which has been affected by conflict for more than 40 years, JICAhas been
working to build trust at various levels by providing continuous support for peace and stability for more than 20
years. Currently, through capacity building support for the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, Japan aim to build trust
between the government and the people, thereby contributing to the consolidation of peace and development in
the conflict-affected areas. From the perspective of the HPD Nexus, special attention is paid to building trust
between refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) and its host communities and supporting the formation
of societies that can coexist with host communities. For example, in Northern Uganda, which has been affected by
conflict and has become a refugee hosting area, the government of Uganda has decided on a policy to formulate an
integrated development plan that includes the needs of refugees in the development plan. JICA plans to support
local governments to formulate their integrated development plans based on improvements in the accountability
and transparency of the local governments to the people, including participatory development that has been
implemented in the region.
//
In recent years, the international environment surrounding development assistance has changed dramatically,
with many developing countries attracting attention as new investment destinations and markets in line with the
progress of economic globalization, and with private funds flowing into developing countries in some years
exceeding ODA. At the same time, activities by not only governments and development agencies but also by private
companies and NGOs are gaining importance, and local governments and small- and medium-sized enterprises are
attracting attention as new development partners. While various actors are tackling development in developing
countries through a variety of approaches that make the most of their respective fields of expertise, ODA is working
to connect each of these actors in order to achieve greater development impact through synergies by taking a
deeper approach.
//
In May 2017, the Government of Japan formulated the "Guidance for Collaborative Value Creation" to guide
ESG and non-financial information disclosure and dialogue with investors and is promoting the improvement of the
quality of corporate information disclosure and dialogue with investors. In May 2019, as part of its promotion of the
SDGs Management Initiative, it formulated the "Guide for SDG Business Management," which outlines the common
elements of good SDG management practices and the perspectives from which investors can evaluate them. This
guide has been widely disseminated both domestically and internationally through the G20 and other forums and
is helping to promote the incorporation of the SDGs into corporate management.
//
Based on the recognition that companies and investors have different time horizons, and that there are
significant challenges in incorporating the SDGs/ESG into management and investment decisions, in August 2020,
substantive dialogues between companies and investors regarding the sustainable improvement of corporate
earning power and the integration of social issues into corporate management based on a long-term time horizon
were proposed as “Sustainability Transformation” (SX).
//
In December 2017, the Kansai SDGs Platform was established (Secretariat: JICA Kansai, the Kansai Bureau of
Economy, Trade and Industry, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, and the Headquarter Secretariat, Union of
Kansai Governments), comprising diverse actors from industry, government, academia, the private sector, and civil
society (NPOs/NGOs) with the aim of improving understanding of the SDGs and promoting collaborative activities.
The platform has more than 1,000 members (as of December 2020), and subcommittee activities are flourishing,
with active regional organizations leading activities while involving members. Established subcommittees include:
Kansai SDGs Contribution Business Network, SDGs Environmental Business Subcommittee, Mutual Growth
Subcommittee, Zero Food Waste, SDGs Knowledge Lab, Barrier-Free Map Subcommittee, and Kansai SDGs Platform Academic Commons. As of December 2020, about 200 SDGs events and actions have been held by members
supported by the platform.
//
In June 2020, Kanagawa Prefecture, serving as secretariat, established the "Japan SDGs Action Promotion
Council" with the participation of the government, local governments, the business community, citizens' groups,
and the next generation, in order to promote the "Japan SDGs Action," a concrete initiative in line with the United
Nations "Decade of Action", in cooperation with the public and private sectors.
//
In March 2021, the Japan SDGs Action Promotion Council and the United Nations SDGs Action Campaign/UNDP
co-hosted the "SDG Global Festival of Action from JAPAN" online to disseminate Japan's efforts to the world. In
conjunction with this, the "Japan SDGs Action Festival" was held in Japan, with such themes as "Climate Change,"
"Life/Poverty/Gap," and "Next Generation/Gender”. Over 160 key persons took the stage in 20 sessions over two
days, sharing advanced cases and proposing concrete actions.
//
Shimokawa Town, Hokkaido, has been working on various regional economic, social, and environmental issues
by establishing a Partnership Center, which is a "center of co-creation and development" that encourages self-reliant
development by various entities through policy proposals and business plans made in cooperation with local and
foreign governments, companies, and organizations, and through support including matching of technologies and
funds. In addition, the Shimokawa has developed its own index to measure the degree of achievement of its
localized version of the SDGs, "Shimokawa's Desired Form in 2030,” which was formulated in 2018, and is working
to disseminate it.
// 
The Ministry of the Environment (MOE) has also been holding "Stakeholders' Meetings" since 2016 to promote
the efforts of each stakeholder in the environmental aspects of the SDGs. This is an open forum where companies,
local governments, civil society organizations, researchers, and relevant government ministries and agencies that
are working on the SDGs can meet to share case studies, exchange opinions, and publicize their efforts to the public.
The goal is to encourage other entities to take action by recognizing pioneering examples. In FY2020, in order to
emphasize local initiatives, the 12th Stakeholders' Meeting and SDGs Roundtable Environment Subcommittee
Meeting was held in November 2020 in a hybrid format of on-site and online meetings in cooperation with Odawara
City, Kanagawa Prefecture — which was also selected as an SDGs Future City — together with the Kanto Regional
Environment Office.
//
The mobilization of private sector funds is essential to fill the funding gap for achieving the SDGs, which is said
to be $2.5 trillion USD per year. Japan has been issuing about 550 million dollars of JICA bonds per year as social
bonds for achieving the SDGs (290 billion yen as of December 2020) in order to stimulate ESG investment and
mobilize domestic private capital for developing countries, which are growth markets.
//
There is a large funding gap to achieving the SDGs in developing countries, and it is important therefore to
improve tax collection capacity with a view to more effectively mobilizing domestic resources. For this reason, Japan
has been actively providing technical assistance and capacity building support for tax systems development and tax
administration in developing countries through international organizations. In addition to financially supporting the
activities of the OECD, IMF, World Bank, and ADB, which support the mobilization of domestic funds in developing
countries, and participating in the operation through donor meetings, etc., we also dispatch tax experts to
contribute to human resources development. It also supports the activities of the Platform for Collaboration on Tax
(PCT), which promotes the coordination of support activities for domestic resource mobilization in these
international organizations.
//
In addition, in cooperation with the OECD, Japan established and funded the OECD Asia-Pacific Academy for Tax
and Financial Crime Investigation for tax and financial crimes investigators from developing countries, and regularly
hold training courses for the Academy.
Furthermore, in cooperation with JICA, Japan has dispatched tax administration advisors to developing
countries and provided training and other support to officials of tax authorities in developing countries invited to
Japan by JICA.
//
In Vietnam, Indonesia, Mongolia, and other countries mainly in Asia, JICA has been providing technical
cooperation to improve tax administration, such as improving taxation practices and taxpayer management, in order to support domestic resource mobilization through the strengthening of the national financial base. In particular, in
Mongolia, the first full-scale revision of the tax law in a quarter of a century has been realized, reflecting the
recommendations of previous technical cooperation projects, and a technical cooperation project is being
implemented to further strengthen the enforcement capacity of the revised tax law.
//
In Indonesia, Japan has supported the government in setting national targets and indicators, formulating action
plans for the central government and the target provinces, and building a monitoring and evaluation system, and
an indicator commentary (metadata), draft provincial action plans for the five target provinces, and a monitoring IT
system are being formulated and developed.
//
In September 2018, Japan launched the "SDGs Business Supporting Survey," which integrates and organizes
research on problem-solving businesses in developing countries (SDGs businesses) and SMEs overseas development
support projects, and supports on-site research, dissemination, and demonstration activities for commercialization
by companies aiming to contribute to the promotion of the SDGs in developing countries through business. A
cumulative total of 1,333 proposals (as of the end of FY2020) have been adopted since its predecessor program
started in FY2010, and about 70% of the completed projects are continuing or preparing for business development
in developing countries.
//
As a concrete example of international collaboration through the SDGs, there is the "Mekong-Japan SDGs
Initiative for 2030" with the countries of the Mekong region in Southeast Asia, which was adopted at the 11th
Mekong-Japan Summit Meeting in November 2019. The "Mekong-Japan SDGs Forum" will be held jointly by the
public and private sectors to share the efforts of each country to achieve the SDGs and aim to resolve issues.
//
In addition, the year 2025, when the Expo 2025 Osaka, Kansai, Japan will be held, will be an important year for
verifying the status of SDGs achievement and accelerating efforts to achieve the SDGs, as the target year for
achieving the SDGs will then be only five years away. In order to make the Expo an international exposition that will
contribute to the achievement of the SDGs and SDGs+Beyond, the government's basic policy for hosting the Expo,
which was approved by the Cabinet on December 21, 2020, states that it will involve a variety of players, including
residents and businesses, even before the event starts, and that these efforts will continue to develop autonomously
after the event. In addition, the necessary support will be provided to developing countries, with the aim of having
150 countries and 25 international organizations participate in the exhibition.
//
The 2020 Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games (hereinafter referred to as the “Tokyo Olympics”) have been
taken as an opportunity to raise awareness of the importance of sustainability in society as a whole and to encourage
action to build a sustainable society. Through the Tokyo Olympics, a variety of initiatives to contribute to the
realization of the SDGs, including the formulation of a "sustainability-conscious management plan" and a
"sustainability-conscious procurement code” are being implemented.
//
In the area of decarbonization, for the first time in the history of the Olympic Games, hydrogen derived from
renewable energy will be used for the torchbearers and the torch relay, and renewable energy will be used to supply
all the electricity for the operation of the Tokyo Olympics. Furthermore, carbon offsetting will be carried out with
the cooperation of more than 200 businesses in the host city, etc., to achieve a "carbon-positive Tokyo Olympics" in
which CO2 emissions will be reduced to zero or less
//
In the field of recycling, we are also implementing the "Everyone's Medal Project" as a citizen-participation
initiative. For the first time in the history of the Olympic Games, all of the gold, silver, and bronze medals for the
Tokyo Olympics will be made from recycled metals extracted from used cell phones and other small home appliances,
with the participation of 90% of the municipalities in Japan. The podiums used at 43 venues will also be made from
used plastic and recovered ocean plastic collected by retail stores across the country. In addition, the athletes' village
plaza (rest facility) will be built with Japanese lumber borrowed free of charge from 63 municipalities across the
country, which will then be re-used by each municipality after the Tokyo Olympics in a relay project. In addition to
these citizen-participation initiatives, the Tokyo Olympics have set the highest reuse/recycling rate for waste
generated by the Games compared to past Olympic Games and are taking measures from the procurement stage to
ensure resource recycling after the Games.
//
Furthermore, for the first time in the history of the Olympic Games, we will aim to manage the Tokyo Olympics
in accordance with the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. Various measures will be taken to ensure
accessibility, such as training on how to treat people with disabilities, the introduction of wheelchair-accessible
vehicles, and ensuring accessibility such as the elimination of steps, as well as the promotion of decent work in
cooperation with the International Labor Organization (ILO). The percentage of female athletes competing in the
Tokyo Olympics will be 49%, the highest in the history of the Olympic Games, and the Organizing Committee is also
promoting a "society in which all people can play an active role and gender equality" by raising the percentage of
women on the Board of Directors to 42% under the leadership of a female president.
//
In this way, the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games are promoting the SDGs with the aim of passing them on
as a legacy to Japan and the world and developing them in diverse ways.
//
Towards the achievement of the SDGs, it is important to accurately grasp the status of the implementation of
the SDGs and to steadily promote them. Therefore, it is stipulated by the SDGs Implementation Guidelines that the
SDGs Promotion Headquarters, the Executive Committee, and the SDGs Promotion Roundtable periodically check,
and review as needed, the progress of efforts based on the SDGs Implementation Guidelines and SDGs Action Plan,
and at the same time, a new mechanism should be established to provide opportunities for stakeholders to reflect
their voices as much as possible, such as by having stakeholder meetings etc. 
//
In order to grasp the degree of the achievement of the SDGs accurately, the use of global indicators was decided
at the United Nations in July 2017, and in August 2019, the Government of Japan released data regarding the global
indicators to measure Japan's achievement of the SDGs5
. At present, 138 indicators, which is 55.9% of 247 indicators
in total, have been publicly disclosed (as of April 2021), and 7 more indicators are going to be released. Although
the government has released the progress results of the SDG global indicators on its website, many of the SDG global
indicators were created with the intension to be used by developing countries, so some indicators are not
necessarily appropriate to measure the progress in Japan. For this reason, the SDG Implementation Guidelines was
designed to enhance the applicability and transparency of the progress evaluation system, noting the ongoing status
of (re-)examination of the global indicators, as well as the evaluation by overseas and domestic research institutes,
and the status of (re-)examining local indicators.
//
The Government of Japan considers it important to accelerate its efforts to achieve the SDGs by 2030, both
domestically and internationally, by continuously assessing the status of the implementation of the SDGs based on
assessments by multi-stakeholders, identifying areas where progress is lagging, conducting policy reviews,
promoting further participation of stakeholders, etc. Thus, in preparing this VNR, the government's own assessment
and the assessments of the private sector members of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable were included.
//
International organizations and think tanks have conducted various evaluations of Japan's progress in achieving
the SDGs, and while there are areas where Japan has been recognized as making advanced efforts, there are also
studies which point out areas where Japan needs to further strengthen its efforts.
//
For example, in a report released in June 2020 by the Bertelsmann Foundation and the Sustainable
Development Solutions Network (SDSN), Japan was rated as having a high level of achievement in SDG 4 (education),
SDG 9 (infrastructure, industrialization, and innovation), and SDG 16 (peace and justice), while SDG 5 (gender
equality), SDG 13 (climate change), SDG 14 (marine resources), SDG 15 (terrestrial resources), and SDG 17 (means
of implementation) were rated as low. 
//
As is mentioned above, at present, there are no indicators which are in line with all the targets of the SDGs.
Although it is difficult to assess the progress of each target, the following section will discuss the main progress and
challenges of the SDGs targets, using statistical data. 
//
ABC1
//
Based on the 2019 Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions, which is not a direct indicator of the
achievement of this target but an indicator that focuses on the distribution and disparity of income in Japan, the
average income per household in 2018 was 5.523 million yen for "all households”. For "senior citizen households",
it was 3.126 million yen, for "households other than senior citizen households" was 6.593 million yen, and for
"households with children" it was 7.459 million yen. 
 //
Based on the same survey, the “child poverty rate” was 16.3% in 2012 when the “General Principles of Policy
on Child Poverty” was first formulated, but it was 13.5% in 2018. There has been improvement in many indicators
with regard to child poverty listed in the "General Principles of Policy on Child Poverty", and society's awareness
and appreciation of child poverty has been increasing. However, there has still been many children and their families
in need of support, and the poverty rate among single-parent families has been particularly high. The Government
of Japan continues to make efforts based on the "General Principles of Policy on Child Poverty".
//
For those in need, support has been provided to promote self-reliance based on the Act on Self-Reliance
Support for Needy Persons, which came in effect in April 2015, and by the end of March 2020, the total number of
persons who had received new consultations was approximately 1.165 million.
//
Furthermore, for those who are still in need despite using all available assets, abilities, and other means, support
has been provided as public assistance. The number of people who received public assistance was at its peak in
March 2015 at approximately 2.17 million and has been decreasing since then to approximately 2.05 million in
December 2020, which is a decrease of approximately 120,000 people. 
//
While there are concerns that the recent COVID-19 pandemic has had a variety of effects on the economic
situation of households, it is necessary to continue to closely monitor those trends and take necessary measures in
order to protect people's livelihoods. From this perspective, it is necessary to steadily implement the initiatives
described in the SDGs Action Plan 2021, promoting measures for social security systems that contribute to the
elimination of poverty and inequality, and those against child poverty, as well as to continue to promote
international cooperation.
//
With regard to the social security system mentioned in Indicator 1.3.1, Japan overcame the turmoil and poverty
immediately after World War II and introduced a system of universal health coverage (UHC) in 1961. In addition to
supporting Japan's socio-economic development and the achievement of a long and healthy life by making it
possible to receive healthcare services at an affordable cost, necessary measures have been implemented from time
to time based on the perspective of strengthening Japan’s healthcare provision system. Support is being provided
to those whose income has declined due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, those who have been forced to
close their businesses, small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) whose business environment has deteriorated,
and small-scale businesses. Based on this experience, Japan will continue to widely appeal the necessity of the UHC
to the world, based on the principle of "Leaving No One’s Health Behind”.
//
Poverty reduction, especially the eradication of absolute poverty, is one of the most fundamental development
challenges in the world, as still many people are suffering from poverty across the globe. In particular, it is important
to provide support from a humanitarian perspective to states and people in fragile situations, being unable to get
a head start on their development for various reasons, and to help them start moving the wheels of development
and move out of fragility. Indicator 1.a.1 shows the total amount of ODA gifts focused on poverty reduction.
//
ABC2
//
Among the indicators on child poverty established in the "General Principles of Policy on Child Poverty"
(approved by the Cabinet in November 2019), as of 2017, 16.9% of households that have children were unable to
buy the food their family needed because of the environment in which they were born and raised (2.5% often had
this problem, 5.1% sometimes had this problem, and 9.2% rarely had this problem) (Source: National Institute of
Population and Social Security Research "Survey on Livelihood and Support for Each Other" (special tabulation)).
This clearly shows that there are children who cannot eat a well-balance diet due to the environment in which they
were born. 
//
The General Principles stipulate that support will be provided to low-income households through educational
assistance under the livelihood protection system and subsidies for school lunches under the school attendance
assistance system, and that efforts will be made to promote the spread and improvement of quality of school
lunches and dietary education to maintain and improve health through proper nutrition.
//
In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of private initiatives by local residents, such as
children's cafeterias, which provide free or inexpensive nutritious meals and warm gatherings and provide
opportunities to eat together for children who have difficulty eating together at home.
//
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the importance of such efforts is increasing, and emergency support projects
are being implemented by NPOs and other organizations. The role of food banks, which provide food to children's
cafeterias etc., is also becoming more important, and support is being provided to food banks to increase their
acceptance and provision of food. In addition, through dietary education, Japan will review the nature of nutrition
and diet, and promote efforts to increase the rate of food self-sufficiency and establish food security. 
//
In May 2021, the "Strategy for Sustainable Food Systems “MeaDRI”" was formulated as a new strategy to
enhance both productivity potential and sustainability of the agriculture, forestry, fisheries and food industries
through innovation. The strategy calls for zero CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion in agriculture, forestry,
and fisheries, 50% reduction in risk-weighted use of chemical pesticides, 30% reduction in chemical fertilizers use,
increase in organic farming to 1 million hectare(equivalent to 25% of farmland), sustainable sourcing for imported
materials by 2030. 
//
Malnutrition has been worsening not only in vulnerable areas but also in many parts of the world due to the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In response, Japan is strengthening its contribution to improving global nutrition.
In consideration of the United Nations Food System Summit will be held in September 2021 and The Tokyo Nutrition 
for Growth (N4G) Summit will be held in Tokyo in December in the same year, Japan will further promote a "No One
Left Behind" nutrition policy for people in all life stages, based on Japan's more than 100 years of experience in
nutrition policy. As a part of this effort, Japan is promoting the development of a healthy and sustainable food
environment, which will be included in its commitment at the N4G Summit and could be applicable to other
countries including Asian countries. In addition, Japan will cooperate internationally to improve nutrition through
the solving the world's food problems and will encourage other countries to make commitments to fund and support
policies for international nutrition improvement.
//
ABC3
//
Based on the Health Promotion Law, Japan formulated the "Healthy Japan 21 (Second Stage)" in 2012, setting
various health-related indicators and targets for the next 10 years, with the intension to extend healthy life
expectancy and reduce health disparities through cooperation among companies, private organizations, and local
governments. Although there have been improvements in the extension of healthy life expectancy and the
reduction of health disparities, further efforts are needed in some areas such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
//
With regard to smoking, various measures are being taken with the goal of "reducing the smoking rate among
adults (those who want to quit smoking will do so)" (target: 12%). In addition, the Health Promotion Law was
amended in 2018 to strengthen measures against second-hand smoking, such as specifying prohibited smoking
areas for each type of facility.
//
Japan has one of the highest suicide rates in the world as a whole and is the highest among the G7 countries,
showing that not only physical health but also mental health is an issue. Based on the 2016 revision of the Basic Law
on Suicide Prevention and the actual situation of suicide in Japan, the Cabinet approved the "Outline of
Comprehensive Suicide Prevention Measures: Aiming to Realize a Society in which No One is Driven to Suicide" in
July 2017. In order to reduce the suicide rate to the current level of other developed countries, the Outline sets a
goal of reducing the suicide mortality rate by more than 30% compared to 2015 (from 18.5 per 100,000 population
in 2015 to less than 13.0) by 2026. Since then, the number of suicides has been decreasing, but after the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of suicides increased in 2020 for the first time in 11 years, and the number of female suicides
in particular increased by 935 compared to the previous year. There are a variety of factors behind female suicides,
including health problems, economic and lifestyle problems, work problems, and family problems, which have been
exacerbated during the COVID-19 pandemic, and may have influenced the increase in female suicides. Japan will
continue to promote comprehensive measures with the aim of realizing a society where no one is driven to suicide. 
//
ABC4
//
In Japan, efforts are being made to reduce the burden of education costs seamlessly from early childhood to
adulthood by making early childhood education and childcare free of charge, enhancing support for expenses of
school supplies for primary and lower secondary education, enhancing tuition support and scholarships for students
in high schools and other schools, and providing support for attending higher education.
//
Early childhood education establishes the basis for lifelong formation of one’s character, and it is extremely
important to ensure that children have opportunities for high-quality early childhood education. Based on this
background, the Child Care and Child Support Law was amended, thereby the free early childhood education and
care (ECEC) policy was implemented from October 1, 2019 in order to accelerate the efforts that had been promoted
in stages. As a result, kindergartens, daycare centers, and certified centers for ECEC are now free of charge for all
children between the ages of three and five.
//
In addition, higher education is a driving force for creating innovation and enhancing national competitiveness
through the fulfillment of its essential functions of "education, research, and social contribution”. At the same time,
as a center for the accumulation of knowledge and human resources, higher education also provides students a
cultivated foundation based on their abilities to observe, think, judge, and express themselves, as well as to acquire
a wide range of culture, maintain a high level of public awareness and ethics, actively support society in accordance
with the changing times, and improve society with logical thinking. It is necessary to promote the enhancement of
higher education through the integrated promotion of university reform, equal access opportunities, and the
improvement of the quality of education and research. In addition, the reality is that children from low-income
families are less likely to go on to college.
//
Therefore, in April 2020, a tuition fee reduction and exemption system has been established and the provision
of scholarships has been expanded based on the "New System for Higher Education Aid" with the aim of reducing
the financial burden of studying at high-quality higher education institutions for students from low-income
households who truly need support, and to take measures against the rapid decline in the birthrate in Japan.
Whether students are eligible for the support is not negatively be judged on the basis of their high school grades
alone, but rather the student's motivation to study and purpose for going on to higher education is regarded as
important, which is confirmed through submission of reports and interviews by their high schools and other
institutions. 
//
In this era, the National Curriculum Standards have been revised in order to ensure that children foster
competencies necessary to develop the future. In the new National Curriculum Standards, the role of school
education and curricula in the future is to foster "builders of a sustainable society," and the philosophy of the ESD
has been incorporated. Based on the new National Curriculum Standards, the ESD has been promoted in all schools
so that children, who will be the leaders of the next generation, can see various issues in their communities and
society as their own problems and develop an attitude of proactive learning from their surroundings. The new
National Curriculum Standards have been fully implemented in elementary schools and elementary departments of
special needs education school from April 2020, and in lower secondary schools and lower secondary departments
ofspecial needs education school from April 2021, and will be sequentially implemented in upper secondary schools
and upper secondary department of special needs education school from April 2022.
//
The realization of a gender-equal society is one of the most important issues that should be addressed by society
as a whole, and in Japan, comprehensive and systematic efforts are being made based on the “Basic Act for a Gender
Equal Society” and the “Basic Plan for Gender Equality”.
//
“The Fifth Basic Plan for Gender Equality”, which was approved by the Cabinet in 2020, continues to promote
measures for the formation of a gender-equal society, following the Fourth Basic Plan. As areas related to SDG 4
(education), for example, raising awareness and promoting understanding through education and other means are
mentioned. From the perspective of developing education and other measures to promote understanding of gender
equality while deepening cooperation with educational institutions and local governments, as well as strengthening
the promotion system, the Government of Japan is going to expand the participation of women in policy-making
processes in the field of school education.
//
In accordance with the Fifth Plan, etc., with regard to school education, efforts are being made in elementary,
middle, and high schools to provide appropriate guidance on gender equality, mutual understanding, and
cooperation according to the developmental stages of students. At the same time, efforts are being made to provide
career education so that both men and women can acquire the abilities and attitudes to achieve their own life goals
and independently choose a career path. In addition, in order to foster an awareness of gender equality from a
young age so that young people, who will be the leaders of the next generation, can independently choose various
career paths without being bound by a stereotyped sense of gender roles, a life planning education program was
developed for high school and university students that can be used in schools as part of the "Next Generation Life
Planning Education Promotion Project".
//
As an example of Japan’s international cooperation based on the idea of “Education for All,” JICA contributes to
the ‘School for All’ Project for Africa, which aims to foster collaborative efforts between communities and schools
in multiple sectors, such as the improvement of children’s skills in reading, writing, and math, enrichment of
educations for girls, improvement of nutrition through school lunches, and improvement of health through health
education. In Niger, public awareness activities in local communities helped to improve the educational environment
of girls and reduce the dropout rate of girls entering the first year of junior high school by 13.4%, from 33.4% to
20.9% in 2019/2020, compared with the previous years. 
//
ABC5
//
Women account for about 51% of the population and about 52% of the voters in Japan. The participation of
both men and women in the policy-making process and the advancement of gender equality in all fields, including
politics, economics, and society, will ensure the sustainable development of Japan's economy and society, and lead
to the realization of a society in which all people can live comfortably.
//
As a result of various initiatives taken in recent years, Japan has made some progress in women’s participation
in society. For example, the number of female executives at listed companies has increased 2.2 times in five years,
and the percentage of women in each managerial position in the private sector has also risen, paving the way for
an increase in the number of women in leadership positions. In addition, there has been steady progress in the
development of legal systems for women’s participation in society, such as the “Act on the Promotion of Female
Participation and Career Advancement in the Workplace” and the “Act on Promotion of Gender Equality in the
Political Field.”
//
However, Japan's overall ranking in the Gender Gap Index is 120th out of 156 countries, which is a very
disappointing situation. The following are some of the factors that lead to the lack of progress in efforts to realize a
gender-equal society in Japan: (1) in the political field, there are difficulties in balancing candidacy and
parliamentary activities with family life, lack of opportunities for human resource development, and harassment
against candidates and politicians; (2) in the economic sector, the pipeline for women to advance from recruitment
to management and executive positions is still in the process of being built; and (3) in society as a whole, there is a
stereotyped perception of gender roles and unconscious bias. In the midst of globalization, gender equality is an
issue that affects the growth potential of the Japanese economy through global competition for human resources
and investment.
//
In addition, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on women has been particularly severe. For example, the
number of employed women, especially non-regular workers, decreased by about twice as much as men in April
2020 compared to the previous month. Moreover, the number of consultations on spousal violence from April 2020
to March 2021 is about 1.6 times higher than the same period last year. Furthermore, the number of suicides among
women in 2020 increased by 935 compared to the previous year. These concerns about the increase and seriousness
of spousal violence and sexual violence, as well as its impact on women's employment and income, reiterate the
importance of gender equality.
//
The government will steadily promote the “Fifth Basic Plan for Gender Equality”, which was approved by the
Cabinet in December 2020, and will firmly address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the employment and
lives of women. In March 2021, the government reaffirmed at a meeting of all ministers that gender equality is an
important and firm policy, and the government has decided "The Intensive Policy for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women 2021" which includes specific proposals to be worked on in FY2021 and FY2022 to achieve
the targets for the promotion and employment of women included in the basic plan. 
//
Advancing efforts to realize a gender-equal society will lead to the realization of an inclusive society in which all
people can feel happy, regardless of sex, age, nationality, sexual orientation and gender identity. Japan will continue
to reflect gender equality and gender perspectives in all policies (gender mainstreaming), and promote further
efforts in cooperation with all stakeholders, including government agencies, private companies, civil society, and
young people.
//
ABC6
//
Japan is located at the eastern edge of Asian monsoonal climate zone, one of the world's heaviest rainfall areas,
with an annual average precipitation of 1,668 mm, which is about 1.4 times higher than the world (land) average of
1,171mm. On the other hand, the annual per capita precipitation in Japan is about 5,000m3
/person/year, which is
about a quarter of the world's annual per capita precipitation of about 20,000m3
/person/year. In addition, rainfall
is concentrated during the rainy season, typhoon season, and snowfall season, which are highly dependent on the
weather, and the terrain is steep with many short rivers, so a large portion of the rainfall is discharged into the sea
within a short time. 
//
Under these conditions, Japan has made various efforts to secure water resources and has built a water
infrastructure. As a result, the water supply penetration rate now exceeds 98%, but since around 1965, there has
been a nationwide trend of less rainfall, and droughts have been occurring in many areas. When droughts occur,
they have a major impact on household life and social activities, such as the inability to prepare meals and use flush
toilets, as well as causing major damage to economic and social activities, such as the shortening or stopping of
factory operations for industrial water, and the poor growth and death of crops for agricultural water. Water is an
important resource that we cannot do without for even a day, and we must continue to work for a stable and reliable
water supply.
//
Access to water is a basic human right, and Japan has been working internationally on stable supply of safe
water, improvement of sanitary environment such as toilets, and sustainable water resource management. In
response to the recent spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, JICA has been working with governmental organizations
and development partners in developing countries to strengthen efforts to promote the practice of hand washing,
which is one of the most important factors in the prevention of infectious diseases, and to supply the safe water
necessary for this practice.
//
ABC7
//
In the wake of the oil crisis, Japan has been promoting thorough energy conservation efforts, both through
regulatory measures under the Energy Conservation Law enacted in 1979 and through budgetary and tax support
measures. These efforts by the public and private sectors have resulted in a 40% improvement in energy
consumption efficiency, which is the highest level of energy conservation in the world. Japan will continue to
promote energy conservation by mobilizing all possible policies, including regulations based on the Energy
Conservation Law.
//
As for renewable energies, the FIT system was introduced in 2012, and as a result, the share of renewable energies,
which was 10% (FY2012), has expanded to 18% (FY2019), being ranked 6th in the world for overall renewable energy
installations (2018) and 3rd in the world for solar power (2018) . The amount of electricity generated has been
growing steadily, exceeding the European and global averages at a pace that has tripled since 2012. The government
is also working to promote the procurement of renewable electricity, with each ministry and agency working to
procure electricity from renewable energy sources at a ratio of 30% or more for FY2021.
//
"Strategic Energy Plan" will be reviewed on the premise of aiming for carbon neutrality by 2050 and greenhouse
gas emission reduction targets for FY2030.Based on the basic premise of the 3E+S (Safety, Energy Security, Economic
efficiency, and Environment), which is the principle of energy policy, Japan will strengthen policy coordination and
initiatives. Under this principle, in order to decarbonize the electric power sector, Japan utilizes renewable energy
as the major power source, works on renewable energy with the principle of top priority, and encourages the
maximum utilization of renewable energy while curbing the burden on the public and coexisting with local
communities. Japan reviews location regulations, seeks to overcome grid constraints and ensure flexibility through
the use of storage batteries including EVs and demand response, and promote bold reforms of the electricity market
system. In addition, Japan encourages steady investment in power transmission and distribution networks and
power sources, as well as cost efficiency and true local production for local consumption, including distributed
energy systems. As for thermal power, the use of CCUS/carbon recycling as a premise and power generation using
hydrogen and ammonia should be pursued as options to the maximum extent possible. With regard to nuclear
power, while reducing dependence on nuclear power as much as possible, restart nuclear power plants with the
highest priority on safety, and steadily promote the establishment of effective nuclear regulations and a nuclear
disaster prevention system including securing of evacuation routes through road construction. Research and
development and human resource development will be promoted for the future, including the pursuit of reactors
with superior safety and other features. In sectors other than the electric power sector, while carbon productivity
is inferior to that of Europe, Japan will focus on electrification based on decarbonization of the supply side, while
thoroughly conserving energy and utilizing unutilized thermal energy. For heat, where demand that cannot
be fully electrified, decarbonized fuels such as hydrogen and carbon recycling will be utilized.
//
ABC8
//
Looking at the employment situation, in recent years, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in
September 2008, the effective job offer ratio reached a record low in the summer of 2009 (0.42 in August 2009) and
the unemployment rate reached a record high (5.5% in July 2009). However, the economy has since recovered, and
the shortage of labor has become so severe that both the effective job offer ratio and the DI for determining the
number of employees are comparable to those during the bubble economy of the early 1990s. Subsequently,
looking at the period from April to June 2020, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the effective job offer
ratio declined significantly (April 2020: 1.32 times, June 2020: 1.11 times), while the unemployment rate rose
moderately (April 2020: 2.6%, June 2020: 2.8%). In particular, there was a large increase in the number of people
absent from work in April, but the increase was much smaller in May and June. According to the results of the “Labor
Force Survey” conducted by the Statistic Bureau of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications and covering
only households surveyed in the second month, slightly more than 40% of those who had been on leave went on to
return to work as employees.
//
In recent years, the number of non-regular workers such as part-time workers, fixed-term workers, and
temporary workers has been on the rise as a whole, and will reach 21.65 million people in 2019, accounting for
about 40% of the employed population. These trends are largely due to such factors as the aging of the society,
which may lead to an increased number of continued non-regular employment after retirement age, and economic
recovery, which could result in an increase in female part-time workers. We can observe a difference in the shapes of the wage curves for "ordinary workers (regular staff)", where the wage amount rises as they age, and for "parttime workers (non-regular staff)" and "ordinary workers (non-regular staff)", in which the curves remain flat as they
age. This difference in the wage curves has shown little change over the past decade. On the other hand, when
comparing the figures in 2010 and 2019, we can observe a greater increase in the figures for "ordinary workers (nonregular staff)" and “part-time workers (non-regular staff)” than those for “ordinary workers (Regular staff)”. This
may be ascribed to efforts to raise the minimum wage and realize equal pay for equal work (elimination of
unreasonable differences in treatment) aiming to improve the treatment of non-regular workers. 
//
In terms of work styles, there is a growing need to address the labor participation rate in light of the expected
future decline in the working-age population and the number of workers as well as changing attitudes toward
women's life courses etc. Therefore, the realization of a harmonious work-life balance is an important issue. Looking
at the changes in attitudes toward and the reality of work-life balance since the establishment of the “Work-Life
Balance Charter” in 2007 shows that what people want and the reality are still diverging, which can be seen in the
survey conducted in 2019, as well. In contrast to the small number of respondents who said they wanted to prioritize
work, the reality is that many respondents said they find themselves forced to prioritize work, and the gap is
particularly large for men aged 20-29, women aged 20-29, 30-39, and 40-49. In addition, about 20-30% of both men
and women wish to give priority not only to "work" and "family life" but also to "community and personal life”.
There has been progress in diversifying working patterns and shortening working hours, etc., against the backdrop
of changing attitudes toward ways of work and the promotion of work style reforms, it has become important to
promote fair treatment between different types of work and to realize a work-life balance.
//
The number of foreign workers in Japan, including technical interns, has reached a record high of 1.72 million,
and there are also unemployed foreigners who are in need, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, etc. Therefore, Hello
Work is providing employment support in cooperation with related organizations. JICA, which has a wide network
of contacts in developing countries and in Japan through its ODA activities, actively supports the development of 
skilled and business human resources in cooperation with domestic and overseas stakeholders, aiming to make
Japan “a country to be chosen”.
It is necessary to continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on employment and take necessary
measures in order to prevent the COVID-19 pandemic and protect employment and livelihoods.
//
ABC9
//
With regard to Japan's innovation, the Global Innovation Index (GII) published by the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) ranked Japan 15th in the world in 2019, having been ranked in the top 20 in the early 2010s
and gradually moving up in recent years. Among the items that make up the GII, Japan has generally shown the
ability to rank in the top 10 for the indicators of public institutions, infrastructure, market maturity, business
sophistication, and knowledge and technology output. However, the rankings for the indicators of human capital,
research, and creative output are generally low. With regard to human capital and research, the low level of
government spending on education and the low number of foreign students in higher education can be cited as
contributing factors. Similarly, the country scores generally low on the creative output index.
//
In addition to declaring its intention to become carbon neutral, the government has set the creation of a
virtuous cycle between the economy and the environment as one of the pillars of its growth strategy and will focus
on the realization of a green society to the fullest extent, mobilizing policies such as the promotion of innovation
and regulatory reform to achieve a decarbonized society. In accordance with the "Sixth Science, Technology and
Innovation Basic Plan" decided in March 2021, the government will promote measures for the promotion of science
and technology in a comprehensive and systematic manner.
//
ABC10
//
Based on the 2019 National Survey on Living Standards, the poverty line (defined as half of the median
equivalent disposable income) in 2018 was 1.27 million yen, and the “relative poverty rate” (the percentage of
household members below the poverty line) was 15.4% (-0.3 percentage points compared to 2015 data). As part of
the integrated reform of social security and taxation that has been implemented since 2014, efforts have been made
to contribute to income redistribution through social security, such as reducing care insurance premiums for lowincome households. These measures have suppressed the increase in the relative poverty rate etc., but at the same
time, challenges in the lives of the poor remain. 
//
The most urgent issue for the time being is to deal with those people and households who have been forced to
leave their jobs or face difficulties in their daily lives due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, unprecedented
measures are being taken in terms of both labor and welfare, based on the actual situation, even for those who
were not covered by the existing system. However, it will be necessary to respond flexibly in terms of both labor
and welfare while keeping a close watch on future changes in the situation. It is also necessary to consider how to
respond to similar risks in the future, while examining the state of support once the situation has settled down. In
the medium to long term, since there is a trend toward polarization in the distribution of savings, it is necessary to
continue to work to ensure that income redistribution through social security and other means functions properly
and that economic disparity does not widen. In order to prevent economic disparity from widening in the future, it
is important to continue our efforts to protect the livelihoods and jobs of persons and households in difficult
economic situations by properly understanding their employment and income situations, as well as their needs for
housing and livelihood support.
//
ABC11
//
Since Japan is prone to natural disasters, the government has been working ceaselessly to provide "public
assistance", implementing hard measures such as building levees, as well as soft measures such as preparing hazard
maps during normal times, and in the event of a disaster, taking emergency life-saving measures, offering supports
such as human support through the dispatch of staff to evacuation centers, push-type material support to urgently
transport essential supplies to evacuees in evacuation centers without waiting for a request from the affected
prefectures, and financial support through the designation of severe disasters and the Act Concerning Support for
Reconstructing Livelihoods of Disaster Victims. 
//
In Japan, the Basic Act on Disaster Control Measures was enacted in 1961 to systematize disaster
countermeasures as a whole and to develop and promote comprehensive and systematic disaster prevention
administration, and the Basic Disaster Prevention Plan was formulated in 1963 as the government's basic plan for
disaster prevention based on this law. The Basic Disaster Management Plan is reviewed every year, looking back at
the disasters of the previous year, and is revised when deemed necessary. In 2020, the plan was revised in the
context of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, all prefectures and municipalities have prepared
regional disaster reduction plans based on the Basic Plan for Disaster Reduction.
//
In addition, it is important to build a transportation system that accurately responds to the major economic and
social changes that Japan is facing, such as a rapidly declining population and an aging society with fewer children.
Particularly in regional areas, the number of people transported by both regional railroads and commercial buses is
on a downward trend, and transport operators are struggling to manage operational costs in such a severe situation.
Around 90% of commercial buses are in the red. In addition, population estimates for 2050 show that the population
of about half of all residential areas in Japan will decrease by more than 50% compared to 2015, and the rate of
population decrease tends to be higher in municipalities with smaller populations. In particular, the populations of
municipalities with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants are expected to decline by about half. As a result, the number of
users of public transportation in smaller municipalities will further decrease, making it more difficult for
transportation operators to manage their businesses and possibly making it impossible to maintain their services.
//
While it is becoming increasingly difficult to maintain and secure public transportation services, the number of
elderly people surrendering their driver's licenses is increasing year by year, and securing means of transportation
is becoming an important issue more and more. In light of this situation, in order for municipalities responsible for
the local needs to improve the public transport services and to ensure means of transportation, stipulating the
regional public transportation plan, which is the master plan for the regional transportation, the "Act for Partial
Revision of the Act on the Revitalization and Renovation of Regional Public Transport for the Purpose of Promoting
Initiatives that Contribute to the Provision of Sustainable Transportation Services" came into effect in November
2020. This revised law enables municipalities to provide continuous transportation services, for instance,
establishing a system to promote efforts to maximize the use of local transportation resources by having bus and cab operators cooperate by utilizing their know-how in private paid passenger transportation provided by
municipalities, etc. in depopulated areas. The system is expected to be beneficial for both municipalities and
bus/taxi operators, as well as for users to receive safe and reliable transportation services. In addition, through the
improvement of business for regional public transportation convenience etc. based on the revised law, public
transportation services are expected to increase convenience and sustainability and improve service by reviewing
routes, schedules, and fares from a user-based perspective. 
//
ABC12
//
While one in nine people in the world, mainly in developing countries, are malnourished, the amount of "food
loss and waste" in Japan, which is food that could be eaten but is thrown away, is 6 million tons per year (estimated
for fiscal year 2018), or about 47 kg per person per year. This is 1.4 times the amount of food aid provided by the
United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) (approximately 4.2 million tons), which means that the equivalent of
1,640 large trucks (10-ton trucks) are discarded every day
//
In light of this current situation, the "Act on Promotion of Food Loss and Waste Reduction" was enacted in
October 2019, and the "Basic Policy on Promotion of Food Loss and Waste Reduction" was approved by the Cabinet
in March 2020. In the policy, Japan set a target to halve the amount of food loss and waste by FY2030 compared to
FY2000 for both food business and household sectors (food business sector: 5.47 million tons in FY2000 to 2.73
million tons in FY2030; household sector: 4.33 million tons in FY2000 to 2.16 million tons in FY2030).
//
As of FY2018, food business-related food loss and waste was 3.24 million tons and home-related food waste
was 2.76 million tons, so efforts by both businesses and households are necessary to further reduce food loss and
waste. 
//
As for food businesses operators, it is necessary to reduce food loss and waste in the entire food supply chain,
and Japan makes efforts as follows: 1) Promoting the review of business practices (easing of delivery deadlines at
retail stores, labeling of best-before dates with year and month, and extension of best-before dates, etc.), and
conducting studies and demonstrations with the participation of private companies such as food manufacturers,
wholesalers, and retailers; 2) Encouraging food companies to promote the use of "food banks," which receive
donations of food and provide it to those in need; 3) Encouraging restaurants etc., "eating up" or "taking the
leftovers home”; and 4) Promoting consumer awareness of food loss and waste reduction at retailers etc.
//
In addition, it is important to encourage consumers to consider and take possible action what each one of us
can do to reduce food loss and waste in their daily lives, Japanese government is working on: 1) Facilitating
understanding of the correct meaning of used-by-date and best-before date; 2) Providing information on how to
choose foods with consideration of when to use them and how to use up foodstuffs at home without wasting them;
and 3) Facilitating raising awareness of eating up when eating out.
//
It is important for people to be aware of food loss and waste in their daily lives, as the amount of food loss and
waste can be changed by the recognition of each people.
//
ABC13
//
Although it is not easy to clarify the causal relationship between individual weather disasters and global
warming, it is estimated that the risk of heavy rainfall disasters and extreme heat has been increased around the
world as global warming progresses. Similar to the global annual average temperature, the annual average
temperature in Japan has been rising with repeated fluctuations, at a rate of 1.21% per 100 years. Recognizing that
climate change is an urgent issue that will have an enormous impact on Japan's economic and social activities as
well as other environmental issues such as biodiversity, Japan is continuing its efforts to combat climate change.
//
In July 2015, Japan submitted its “Intended Nationally Determined Contribution” (INDC) to the United Nations,
which included a target of reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 26% in FY2030 compared to FY2013
(considered as a “Nationally Determined Contribution” (NDC) following Japan's conclusion of the Paris Agreement
in November 2016). In the NDC submitted in March 2020, Japan stated that it would carry out a review on the Plan
for Global Warming Countermeasures, and that the review of reduction target in the NDC will be carried out
consistently with the revision of the energy mix so as not to be held up until the next deadline for quinquennial
submission pursuant to the Paris Agreement, and aiming at aspiring figures to reflect further ambitious efforts. In
2019, the Cabinet approved "The Long-term Strategy under the Paris Agreement," showing a vision for the
realization of a decarbonized society in various fields, including energy, industry, transportation, and
community/living, as well as the direction of measures and policies to achieve this vision and promote cross-sectoral
efforts.
//
According to the preliminary figures for FY2019, total GHG emissions have decreased for the sixth consecutive
year since FY2014, falling to a record low following FY2018 and since FY1990, when emission estimates began. In
addition, total amount of GHG per unit of real GDP have decreased for the seventh consecutive year since FY2013.
//
Japan is continuing its efforts in international community to address climate change. In 2015, Japan announced
in "Actions for Cool Earth 2.0 (ACE 2.0)" that it would provide, in 2020, approximately 1.3 trillion yen of public and
private climate finance, and has steadily achieved its goal. Additionally, following the initial contribution of $1.5
billion to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) (2015-2018), in 2019, Japan announced its commitment of up to $1.5 billion
over the four-year period from 2020 to 2023, depending on GCF activities (Japan's cumulative contribution is the
second largest after the UK). 
//
Furthermore, in October 2020, Prime Minister Suga declared that Japan would aim to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions to net-zero, that is, to realize a carbon-neutral, decarbonized society by 2050. The NDC for 2030 will be
discussed extensively, including how the energy policy should be, the decarbonization of local areas, and the
transformation of people's lifestyles.
//
ABC14
//
The number of cases of marine pollution confirmed by the Japan Coast Guard in the waters surrounding Japan
in 2020 was 453, an increase of 21 cases compared to 432 cases in the previous year (the average number of cases
in the past 10 years was 415). In terms of the number of confirmed cases of pollution by pollutants (oil, waste,
hazardous liquid substances, and others), 286 (64%) were by oil, accounting for the largest number of confirmed
cases, a decrease of 11 cases compared to 275 cases in the previous year (the average number of confirmed cases
in the past 10 years was 266). After oil, the second largest number of confirmed cases of contamination was by
waste, with 158 cases (36%), an increase of 14 cases compared to 144 cases in the previous year (the average of
129 cases in the past 10 years). In particular, the number of cases caused by the general public increased by 13%,
from 84 in the previous year to 95 cases. The number of confirmed cases of contamination by hazardous liquid
substances was 1 (1%), a decrease of 2 cases compared to 3 cases in the previous year (average of 7 cases in the
past 10 years).
//
In addition, it is estimated that more than several million tons of plastic litter is discharged into the ocean
annually, and a large amount of litter, including that thought to have been discharged overseas, has washed ashore
on Japanese beaches, as well. Plastic litter discharged into the ocean affects the environment and ecosystem in
various ways – biological damage to sea birds and marine organisms from eating plastic by mistake, ghost fishing
where marine organisms get entangled in discarded or lost fishing gear (nets, ropes, etc.) and die, and deterioration
of the natural landscape of the coast, etc. Furthermore, marine plastic litter also damages fishery activities by mixing
garbage into the catch and affecting navigation due to garbage entanglement in the screws of fishing boats. And
what is worse, it has been pointed out that micro plastics, which are created when plastics are gradually degraded
by ultraviolet rays, and crushed and fragmented by mechanical action, have the property of adsorbing harmful
chemical substances, and there are concerns that the adsorbed harmful chemical substances may affect marine
organisms through the food chain.
//
In Japan, in the “Third Basic Plan on Ocean Policy” approved by the Cabinet in May 2018, measures to deal with
marine litter were positioned as one of the measures to be taken by relevant ministries and agencies, and the Act
on Promotion of Coastal Debris Disposal, which was revised in June of the same year, stipulates that business
operators are obligated to make efforts to reduce the discharge of waste plastics in order to reduce the discharge
of micro plastics into the sea. Furthermore, in May 2019, the “National Action Plan for Marine Plastic Litter” was
formulated by the relevant ministerial meeting, the “Basic Policy for Comprehensive and Effective Promotion of
Coastal Debris Countermeasures” based on the “Coastal Debris Disposal Promotion Act” was revised, and the
“Resource Circulation Strategy for Plastics” based on the “Fourth Fundamental Plan for Establishing a Sound
Material-Cycle Society” was developed, setting forth the government's overall policy for tackling the marine plastic
litter issues.
//
The forest area in Japan has remained mostly unchanged, at 24.94 million hectares as of the end of March 2017,
and about two-thirds of Japan’s 37.8 million hectares of land area is forested. That has remained constant for the
past half century. In addition, 18.2% of the forests are legally protected as national parks, wilderness preservation
areas, protected forests, green corridors, etc., and efforts are being made to conserve forest biodiversity. Japan's
forest accumulation, mainly in planted forests, has been increasing year by year, reaching approximately 5.2 billion
m3 as of the end of March 2017. In terms of forest aboveground biomass, this is 113 tons per hectare. Out of this
forest areas, planted forests account for approximately 3.3 billion m3
, which is about 60%.
//
As domestic forest resources are entering a period of use in earnest, in order to sustainably demonstrate the
multiple functions of forests, it is important to properly maintain and conserve forests and to establish a cycle of forest resources that involves "harvesting, using, and planting". In Japan, under the forest planning system by the
national, prefectural, and municipal governments, almost all forests are covered under long-term forest
management plans. In line with the “Basic Plan for Forest and Forestry”, the government has formulated the
“National Forest Plan”, which covers all forests in Japan, and sets out targets for the development and conservation
of forests, planned volumes of timber harvested from logging stands, the area of forestation, standards for
operations, and so on.
//
ABC16
//
With regard to child abuse, the number of cases of abuse consultations with Child Guidance Centers has been
consistently increasing, and during FY2019, 215 Child Guidance Centers nationwide responded to a record number
of 193,780 cases of child abuse consultations. In response to the situation where many irreplaceable children's lives
have been lost due to child abuse, in order to strengthen measures to prevent child abuse, in 2019, the “Act on
Partial Amendment to the Child Welfare Act, etc. for the Purpose of Strengthening Measures for the Prevention of
Child Abuse” was enacted (except for some provisions, the Act will come into effect on April 1, 2020) with the
following measures: legal stipulation of the prohibition of corporal punishment; separation of those in charge of
"intervention" (temporary protection, etc.) from those in charge of "guardian support" in Child Guidance Centers;
promotion of placing lawyers etc. in Child Guidance Centers; and strengthening cooperation with domestic violence
measures. 
//
ABC17
//
Japan's ODA in 2019 was about $15,587.66 million USD (about 1,699.8 billion yen) under the Grant Equivalent
System (GE System), which was introduced as the standard ODA calculation method of the OECD Development
Assistance Committee (DAC) since 2018. The gross ODA disbursement amounted to about $18,919.77 million USD
(about 2,063.1 billion yen), an increase of about 9.7% on a dollar basis (about 8.3% in yen terms) compared to the
previous year (2019). As a result, Japan is ranked fourth among the DAC countries, following the United States,
Germany, and the United Kingdom, both in terms of GE System and gross disbursements. In terms of gross national
income (GNI) ratio, Japan's ratio was 0.20% in 2010 and 0.29% in 2019. The ratio of ODA to GNI for LDCs in 2019
was 0.10% (on a net disbursement basis). 
//
The funding gap to achieve the SDGs, which was estimated to be $2.5 trillion USD per year before the COVID19 pandemic, is expected to widen further in the future. In order to achieve the SDGs, it is essential to accurately
grasp the financial flows to developing countries and effectively utilize the limited development funds. At present,
at the OECD and various international forums, discussions are conducted on the creation of rules and frameworks
for international aid, including aid from emerging donors and the use of private funds, and Japan will continue to
be actively involved in these discussions.
//
According to a survey conducted by Dentsu in 2020, the recognition rate of the term "SDGs" was 29.1%, an
increase of 13.1 percentage points from the FY2019 survey. The awareness rate is growing among younger
generations, including male teens and female 20-somethings. Although the level of awareness gets steadily higher,
Japan would like to make efforts to reach out to a wider range of people in order to lead to specific initiatives and
changes in people's behavior.
//
As for local governments, only 1% of local governments were implementing SDGs in 2017, but this figure rose
to 39.7% in 2020. Going forward, Japan will work toward the goal of increasing the percentage of local governments
working on the SDGs to 60% by the end of FY2024.
//
In addition, the mobilization of private funds for the solution of economic and social issues in developing
countries has been called for. The SMEs/SDGs businesses Supporting Survey conducted by JICA are promoting
various means to solve economic and social issues through the business activities of private companies and are
contributing to regional economic growth and revitalization.
//
//
//
The government has made some progress in building a framework, including the efforts of the SDGs Promotion
Headquarters and the SDGs Promotion Roundtable (annual action plans, Japan SDGs Awards, establishment of
subcommittees, etc.) and the revision of the SDGs Implementation Guidelines in 2019. The members of the
SDGs Promotion Roundtable proactively made policy proposals for the promotion of the SDGs. In particular,
for the revision of the Implementation Guidelines, an opinion exchange meeting was held in September 2019
with the participation of various stakeholders at the call of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable members, including
civil society members. Through dialogue with the SDGs Promotion Roundtable, the Promotion Division actively
worked to improve SDG policies.
2. With regard to the climate crisis, which is related to the SDGs as a whole and threatens the future of humanity
and the Earth, Prime Minister SUGA Yoshihide announced an interim target of virtually zero greenhouse gas
emissions by 2050 and a 46% reduction by 2030.
3. Significant progress was also made in the recognition of the SDGs by various sectors, including business, civil
society, local governments, and education, as well as in the public relations system to support this recognition.
In addition to the points described below as progress by goal, the following points can be pointed out as areas
where particular progress was made: 
//
According to the results of a questionnaire survey by the Keidanren Corporate Behavior Charter
(conducted from July to August 2020), the number of companies that responded that they would
"integrate the SDGs into management (incorporate the SDGs into business strategy)" increased fourfold,
from 10% two years ago to 42%, indicating that the integration of the SDGs into management is steadily
progressing. As for initiatives, many companies are evaluating their progress and reporting the results using the SDGs and their own evaluation indicators for materiality based on their medium-term
management goals.
//
In October 2020, based on the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights approved by the UN
Human Rights Council in 2011, the Japanese government published the Action Plan on Business and
Human Rights (NAP 2020-2025). The plan includes the promotion of the introduction of human rights due
diligence. With regard to the issue of foreign workers, while there are many issues to be addressed for a
symbiotic society under the COVID-19 Pandemic, such as guaranteeing labor rights and access to
healthcare, developers and construction companies in the supply chain were working together to
establish a human rights due diligence system, and in order to realize decent work for foreign workers in
Japan (including foegin workers who work as technical interns) the“Japan Platform for Migrant Workers
toward Responsible and Inclusive Society”, a platform for cooperation among companies, JICA and NGOs
was established.
//
ESG investment, SDGs investment, and impact investment, to name but a few, have become popular as
investments that contribute to the achievement of the SDGs. In addition, the concept of SDGs finance for
local development was proposed, and the idea of providing active support to companies that promote
the SDGs was born.
//
 In order to encourage constructive dialogue on sustainability between companies and investors, the
Corporate Governance Code and the Guidelines for Investor and Company Engagement were revised.
//
According to the "SDGs Status Survey" conducted by GCNJ and the Institute for Global Environmental
Strategies (IGES), the rate of SDGs recognition and retention by management has reached 85% (2020),
indicating that the SDGs are becoming more prevalent in corporate management. In addition, some
general SDGs awareness surveys have exceeded 50% for the first time in 2021.
//
 Learning about the SDGs has been included in school curriculums, and there has been remarkable growth
in awareness of the SDGs among the teenage and 20-something age groups. A project for junior and senior
high school students to create Japanese versions of the 169 target icons received more than 20,000
applications, and Japanese versions of the icons were decided.
// 
As of mid-April, the number of Japanese members of the SDG Media Compact, a framework for
cooperation between the UN and the media, reached 70, the largest number of members from a single
country. In addition, the number of media working on ongoing campaigns to encourage action on the
SDGs has increased since 2020.
//
The SDGs Global Festival of Action held by UNDP in Japan was the first to be held outside of Germany and
ranked first in the world in terms of the number of participants by country.
//
The number of SDGs Future City has increased to 93, and 30 model projects have been implemented as of
April 2021. The number of cities is expected to increase by about 30 cities every year.
//
COVID-19 has exposed various unsustainable aspects of Japanese society. In particular, the vulnerable have
been disproportionately affected, the number of young people who feel increasingly isolated has increased,
and the elderly, women and girls, children, youth, the needy, foreigners, people with disabilities, LGBTQI+, and
people with underlying medical conditions tend to be "left behind".
In addition, the roles of each stakeholder are not well organized, and there is insufficient policy coordination to
resolve trade-offs and create synergies, and there is a lack of inter-sectoral collaboration. Although some good
examples are beginning to emerge, they have not yet been organized and systematized.
//
The following is an assessment of the progress made on each of the 17 goals since 2017, including the impact
of the COVID-19 Pandemic, which is particularly important to stakeholders. It should be noted that many of the
initiatives for a given goal also contribute to the achievement of multiple other goals.
//
The poverty rate is 15.4% in 2018, with one in six people living in poverty. The child poverty rate is 13.5%
and one in seven children is said to be poor, which is far from "halving the poverty rate (1.2)" (both from the
2019 Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions, Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare). It is necessary to
formulate and implement policies for this purpose.
 The state of the global indicator "1.2.1 Percentage of the population living below the poverty line in each
country, by sex and age" should be improved, where it is stated that "there is currently no data available to
provide”.
 As the use of public assistance becomes more difficult due to conditionality and other factors, the number
of people who maintain their livelihood through special loans that require repayment is rapidly increasing.
//
Overall, the aging and declining population has greatly reduced the sustainability of the region. This has
also affected the sustainability of agriculture, forestry, and fisheries.
 Cooperatives (agricultural cooperatives, fishing cooperatives, forestry cooperatives, etc.) have set the
realization of the SDGs as the purpose of their business and activities, and are working to revitalize
communities, create environments that are resistant to disasters and infectious diseases, and maintain and
develop economic activities in rural areas.
 In many areas, entrepreneurial activities that take advantage of local characteristics, including NPOs, landbased organizations, and self-sustained forestry, are making progress in collaboration with local
governments, universities, and research institutions. In these regions, the aim is to create sustainable
communities in the face of aging and depopulation through new forms of sustainable community
development and cooperation between agriculture, forestry, and welfare in relation to the aging
population. Many of the local governments that are making progress in these areas have been recognized
as SDGs Future Cities.
//
Target 3.8 (Universal Health Coverage) has become a policy priority for the international community, and
Japan's contribution is highly appreciated. There is a need to further improve international awareness of
its importance under the COVID-19 Pandemic. It is also highly commendable that Japan has been engaged
in international cooperation to overcome the COVID-19 Pandemic since the beginning of 2020 and has
been actively involved in the creation and funding of the ACT Accelerators and COVAX Facility.
 On the other hand, in Japan, from the perspective of Target 3.8, the status of access to isolation and
medical facilities, including testing and contact tracing (active epidemiological surveillance), preventive
measures (masks, PPE), and methods and effectiveness of providing preventive messages, is inadequate.
In particular, it became clear that access to medical, welfare, and health services for foreign residents in
Japan is not well developed. At the same time, there is a need to further promote education and awareness
and correct understanding of the public medical insurance, social welfare, social security, and public
assistance systems, which support universal health coverage in Japan.
 The importance of One Health (hygiene of humans, animals, and the environment) has been recognized,
and related efforts are being made by the national government and some local governments. Research on
planetary health is also underway, focusing on the relationship with global ecological changes.
 In 2020, the number of suicides increased for the first time in 11 years due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
//
The new Courses of Study for elementary, junior high, and senior high schools, which have been revised
sequentially since 2000, all clearly state the need to "foster the creator of a sustainable society," and
learning about the SDGs has been incorporated into a variety of subjects. The GIGA school concept, which
focuses on one terminal per person and a high-speed, high-capacity communication network, has
progressed, and the educational ICT environment has been improved. While the COVID-19 Pandemic
promoted the development of online education, the digital divide became apparent even in Japan, which
is an advanced country, and access to education where no one is left behind became an issue again. In
addition, training on new forms of teaching methods, including online classes, is still inadequate, and
future measures are important.
 One in six (about 16%) of foreign national children and adolescents are not enrolled in school, a situation
that may be further exacerbated by the COVID-19 Pandemic.
//
There is a large difference in the amount of time men and women spend working at home, and there is
still a strong sense of stereotyped gender roles. The fact that the time spent in unpaid domestic work (care
work) is heavily skewed toward women led to an increase in the burden on women under school closure
measures and the introduction of telework, and has serious implications for women, especially when
combined with employment concerns.
 The gender gap is further aggravated by the fact that the gender gap index in Japan is the lowest among
the G7 countries (120th), which is a significant challenge. About 70% of the public service workforce is nonregular female workers, and about 70% of non-regular workers are women (2020 Labor Force Survey).
There is also a gender gap in the percentage of students who attend four-year universities (2018 White
Paper on Gender Equality). In addition, the COVID-19 Pandemic has depleted the continuation of shortterm employment contracts, causing serious problems such as rent arrears; the situation for single mothers
is particularly serious. The food and beverage industry and the accommodation industry, which were
strongly affected by the pandemic, are also industries in which women make up the majority of workers,
and the number of women employed in these industries declined particularly sharply in April 2020
(740,000 women compared to 350,000 men). The COVID-19 Pandemic also revealed sexual and
reproductive health challenges, such as an increase in unwanted pregnancies and "menstrual poverty"
among young women. There are also reports of cases where foreign women have not been able to access
reproductive health services such as perinatal care, childbirth, contraception, and abortion.
In the business world, 163 major companies have expressed their support for the initiative to increase the
percentage of women on boards to 30% or more by 2030. As of the end of July 2020, the percentage of
female executives on the TOPIX 100 stands at 12.9%.
 The number of suicides, especially among women, has risen as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic;
according to a survey conducted in October 2020, the number of suicides increased by 86% from the
previous year, and doubled among those in their 20s and 40s.
 Because the head of the household was the recipient of the special flat-rate benefits paid by the
government due to the COVID-19 Pandemic, separated women and victims of domestic violence were
reported to be unable to receive the benefits.
 The number of consultations on domestic violence from April 2020 to February 2021 increased by about
1.5 times compared to the same period of the previous year against the background of increased stress
among family members due to refraining from going out, teleworking, and further economic uncertainty.
//
While access to safe drinking water has reached almost 100%, there is a need to eliminate those who are
left behind. Currently, 98% of the population is served by water services. On the other hand, there are
issues such as the aging of the water supply infrastructure, with over 20,000 incidents of leakage and
damage occurring annually, and delays in earthquake resistance.
 Nationwide, 3152 water treatment plants (16% of the total) are located in areas that are expected to be
flooded, and of these, 2,552 facilities have not taken measures to prevent flooding.
//
In view of the goal of reducing emissions to zero by 2050, Japan is still far from achieving a significant
increase in renewable energy. As of 2017, the share of renewable energy in Japan's total electricity
generation (excluding hydropower) was 8.1%, ranking 6th in the world, and it is necessary to further
expand the introduction of renewable energy.
//
Under the COVID-19 Pandemic, companies made the utmost efforts to continue their business operations
and maintain employment by utilizing support measures such as employment adjustment subsidies. As a
result, the unemployment rate in Japan is just under 3%, which is lower than the rate at the time of the
Lehman Shock or in Western countries.
 According to the "Survey on Employment in the COVID-19 Pandemic 2020" released by Japanese Trade
Union Confederation in December 2020, 58.1% of respondents answered that they feel uneasy about their 
own employment considering the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the performance of their
companies.
 The number of employed non-regular workers, including part-time and temporary workers, decreased by
more than one million due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
 It is hoped that the enactment of the Workers' Cooperative Law will open up new options for ensuring
work opportunities for people in vulnerable situations.
//
There is inadequate provision of scientifically accurate information and challenges in the interface between
science and policy. This is also evident in the COVID-19 measures, highlighting the importance of putting
in place proven preventive measures.
//
There has been no progress in improving the Parma ratio (the ratio of income between the richest 10%
and the poorest 40%). It has also been pointed out that the income redistribution function is poor, and
that inequality is increasing.
 Discrimination and prejudice against healthcare workers and people infected with COVID-19 is increasing,
but the government's "#Spread the Thank You Circle" project and the "Citrus Ribbon Project" in rural areas
have been developed to address this and have had some effect.
 In relation to Indicator 10.7.2, while Japan's population continues to decline, the country has faced major
challenges in accepting foreign nationals and realizing a symbiotic society. Even today, the country faces
major challenges in realizing safe, orderly, and appropriate immigration policies, including the guarantee
of labor rights and the right to access healthcare for foreign workers working as technical interns and
students, as well as the acceptance of refugees. There is a need for policy reexamination and reform in
cooperation with local governments, civil society, and research institutions.
//
The disparity between urban and rural areas became more pronounced in indicators 11.1.1 (population
living in informal settlements and inadequate housing), 11.2.1 (population with easy access to public
transportation) and 11.3.2 (cities with mechanisms for direct participation of civil society in urban planning
and management), which has been an issue since before the COVID-19 Pandemic.
 The number of SDGs Future Cities has increased every year to 93 cities and 30 model projects as of April
2021, and will continue to increase by about 30 cities every year. Some Future Cities have incorporated
actions to achieve the SDGs into their budgets. In particular, there are many examples of registration and 
certification systems, and advanced examples can be seen in prefectures of Nagano, Kumamoto, and
Kanagawa, as well as the cities of Yokohama, Maniwa, Tsukuba, and Saitama, among others. In addition, it
is highly commendable that municipalities pioneering "resident proposal-based projects," in which ideas
proposed by local residents for solving local problems and creating new values are introduced into
administrative policies in a participatory manner and with a certain budget, have been named as SDGs
Future Cities.
//
Despite the development of the Resource Circulation Strategy for Plastics by the government and the
movement toward complete recycling of PET bottles in the industrial and distribution sectors, Japan still
ranks second in the world in the amount of disposable plastic containers per capita.
 Efforts are underway to promote the resource circulation for plastics, including the Clean Ocean Materials
Alliance (CLOMA), which aims to solve the marine plastics litter issues, as well as activities to achieve 100%
of effective utilization rate for PET bottle.
 With the Food Loss Reduction Act coming into effect in October 2019, efforts to reduce food loss are
expanding at various levels.
 From the consumer perspective, the SDGs concept is becoming more widespread, and initiatives such as
ethical consumption are gradually being implemented.
 On the other hand, material footprints and waste emissions have not been significantly reduced yet.
 There is a growing trend for companies to develop sustainability and the SDGs reports.
//
Japanese companies are actively participating in international initiatives on climate change and the
environment (TCFD, SBTi, RE100, etc.). Looking at the number of participating companies in Japan in
comparison to the rest of the world, TCFD: 342/1791, SBTi: 141/1559, RE100: 56/317, and efforts to
decarbonize management are spreading among major developed companies in Japan.
 The Japan Business Federation, in cooperation with the Japanese government, is working to accelerate the
actions of companies and organizations toward a decarbonized society through "Challenge Zero" to
promote collaboration among companies in the same and different industries, industry, academia, and
government to create innovations, and to attract ESG investment. As of April 2021, 183 companies and
organizations have signed the challenge.
In Japan, more than 300 local governments have announced their commitment to zero-carbon cities. At
the corporate level, more than 90% of companies in the "SDGs Survey" are taking steps to decarbonize
their operations.
 The government, universities, and the private sector are beginning to conduct research and initiatives to
develop scenarios that take into account intergenerational equity and aim for a sustainable society and
decarbonization.
 The understanding of climate change at the citizen level is low internationally (IPSOS survey), and support
for the Paris Agreement is low (Yale University-Facebook joint survey). The choices we make in our daily
lives toward a decarbonized society have not yet become an ambitious movement.
//
While progress has been made toward "increasing the awareness of biodiversity in society" by
strengthening public awareness activities on biodiversity by various organizations, the awareness of the
term "biodiversity", which was set as a target of 75% or more, fell short of the target at 51.8% (Public
Opinion Survey on Environmental Issues 2018). On the other hand, according to a Japan Business
Federation survey, 90% of corporate executives know the meaning of the term biodiversity.
 As of June 2020, 236 companies and organizations have endorsed the Japan Business Federation
Declaration on Biodiversity, which was revised in October 2018, and are working on it (Japan Business
Federation Biodiversity Initiative).
 The biodiversity targets of the SDGs have not yet been achieved, although they are set for 2020. In addition,
there is no target set for 2030. The post-2020 framework should be positioned as an update of the
biodiversity-related targets of the SDGs.
//
From the perspective of Goal 16.a (prevention of violence and eradication of terrorism and crime), we are
playing an international role by hosting the Kyoto Congress, and we are working on judicial and criminal
measures and the development of legal systems in developing countries.
 Human rights violations and abuses in detention facilities, both public and private, such as prisons,
detention centers for foreigners, hospitals for the aged, facilities for the elderly, and mental hospitals, have
become an issue in the UN review of the Covenant on Civil Liberties.
 There is inadequate participation in decision-making (16.7), including COVID-19 measures. Opportunities
for diverse stakeholders to participate in the decision-making process, including the formulation of VNRs,
should be increased. In particular, civil society, voices of the next generation, and gender perspectives are 
lacking. On the other hand, many local governments have introduced a system of "resident proposal-based
projects" in the form of "collaborative community development ordinances" to introduce into
administrative policies local solutions to local problems and the creation of new values based on the ideas
of residents in a participatory manner and with a certain budget. There are also examples such as the
stakeholder meetings for the formulation of the SDGs Implementation Guidelines for 2019. These need to
be more actively promoted as a modality of participatory decision-making.
 Public institutions and policies are not being managed with sufficient transparency, openness, and
accountability, especially in relation to people and communities in vulnerable situations.
//
With regard to ODA, although aid to LDCs is not high, the government has been leading the international
community's efforts on UHC, especially in relation to "human security," and especially in policies related
to international health. The government's focus on global health initiatives after COVID-19 is commendable.
 In terms of Target 17.14 (strengthening policy coherence for sustainable development), the speech by
Prime Minister Suga at the UN General Assembly last year is commendable.
 In the face of an increasing number of natural disasters originating from climate change, Prime Minister
Suga's initiative on disaster prevention measures from the perspective of human security is also
commendable. Disaster prevention and decarbonization technologies are also areas where Japan has
potential from a corporate perspective.
 The SDGs Global Festival of Action from JAPAN, jointly held by the UN SDG Action Campaign/UNDP and
the Japan SDG Action Promotion Council in March 2021, is an example of stakeholder-led global
partnership promotion.
//
The development of holistic and objective targets, science-based targets, and indicators for the achievement of
the SDGs in Japan will be important but is currently lagging behind. In other words, the tools to link the efforts of
Japan's local communities, companies, and organizations to the achievement of the national and global goals are
underdeveloped. This has a negative impact on the ability of companies to implement the PDCA (Plan-Do-CheckAct) management cycle to achieve the SDGs by evaluating and analyzing the gaps to achieving the goals and the
factors behind them. Goal setting is an urgent issue. In order to link the good examples that are emerging to concrete
changes to ensure that "no one is left behind," a system to address the SDGs in a more cross-sectoral and integrated
manner must be created within the government, and specific progress must be clarified based on achievement targets, including global indicators. What needs to be achieved by when and what needs to be done in order to
achieve these goals must be shared by society as a whole.
//
Also, the action plans announced every year should be quantified. In order to formulate evidence-based policies,
the action plan should clarify baseline data, targets, and deadlines for achieving them, and conduct a gap analysis
based on this.
//
In order to accelerate efforts, awareness-raising activities in the future need to be shifted from quantity to
quality. We are entering a phase where it is important to coalesce various actions into a big swell for change. For
example, citizens, national and local governments, and corporations need to make choices to realize a decarbonized
society. It will be essential to provide information on what actions can have a significant impact on emission
reductions in order to turn this into a movement.
//
To achieve the SDGs, new business models and their operation will be necessary, but there is a risk that old
regulations and industry rules will become an impediment. For example, it has been pointed out that grid constraints
on transmission lines for "renewable energy" which is important for reducing CO2 emissions, has become an
impediment to investment in renewable energy. In addition to renewable energy, we should actively remove
obstacles to the development of new business models for net-zero CO2 emissions, such as EVs, transportation, and
new energy, and work on mechanisms to promote them.
//
Companies need to set targets for their own initiatives and deepen their understanding and evaluation of the
results. Regarding business and human rights, it is important to establish an effective monitoring system and
implement the PCDA cycle in accordance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. There have
been reports of harassment in job-hunting activities, and under the COVID-19 Pandemic, such harassment has been
reported to have occurred in online job-hunting activities. While the digital transformation and "new ways of
working" have led to an improved work-life balance and increased productivity, it is important to promote
digitization in line with the SDGs so that it does not lead to harassment, violation of workers' rights, job insecurity,
or a widening digital divide. It is important to promote inclusive and ethical digitalization.
//
The COVID-19 crisis brought to light the lack of awareness of the importance of ensuring leadership and
governance, which are key components of health systems under a pandemic. From the perspective of crisis
management against future pandemics, it will be necessary to strengthen appropriate leadership and governance
based on the lessons learned.
//
There is a need for institutional reforms that do not allow human rights violations, especially in penal and
immigration detention facilities, as well as the establishment of independent national human rights institutions for
fair access to justice and more immediate human rights redress.
//
 Regarding indicators, the development of global indicators should be promoted, and in addition to the
use of alternative indicators, if there is currently no data that can be produced, a "release date" should
be announced.
2) In light of the principle of "leaving no one behind" in the SDGs, it is necessary to provide as much
disaggregated data as possible (by gender, age, disability, etc.) on the progress of each target, not only
for the population as a whole, but also for groups that are vulnerable in institutional, social, economic,
and environmental aspects.
3) For those with established systems but operational challenges, it is necessary to establish national
indicators that complement the global indicators (e.g., Target 16.10).
4) In order to clarify the situation of vulnerability in concrete terms, not only quantitative methods but also
qualitative contents should be collected as much as possible, including the attitude of its manifestation.
In addition, it is necessary to ensure the maximum participation of the parties concerned and civil
society organizations that are closest to the parties concerned and which work with their trust in the
evaluation process.
5) In addition to the review of each goal, evaluation should also be conducted from the perspective of
multi-benefit creation and synergy among multiple goals. For example, with regard to climate change
and gender, the importance of gender equality and women's empowerment is stated in the Paris
Agreement, and UN agencies are promoting initiatives such as the promotion of women's employment
in the introduction of renewable energy. Japan is promoting zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 and
women's empowerment, and we should also evaluate what efforts are being made to achieve both
simultaneously. For example, qualitative and quantitative analysis of the secondary effects of clean
energy (SDG 7), industry and technological innovation (SDG 9), urban disaster prevention (SDG 11),
biodiversity conservation (SDG 15, etc.), and COVID-19 countermeasures (SDG 3) could be considered.
Synergies among multiple goals are also being addressed in the pilot program on monitoring and
evaluation of the SDGs being implemented by the Ministry of the Environment.
6) In the evaluation report, it is important to introduce not only the "model presentation," degree of
achievement, and successes, but also current issues, failures, and cases of difficulties faced, in order to
gain sympathy from other countries. In the case of presenting a model, it is important to appeal to the
universality and imitability of the model, and to demonstrate the strategic nature and high quality of the
method.
7) The SDGs are an issue that will affect the future of young people, and it is essential to provide a forum
for continuous exchange of opinions in order to reflect the opinions of young people in policies in the
follow-up and review of the SDGs.
//
For such an evaluation system to work, it is important to establish a science and policy framework and a better
science-policy interface. Consideration of the development of progress and monitoring tools that bridge the efforts
of national and local governments and businesses will be important from this perspective.
To this end, an evaluation report should be submitted around 2025. Each country should do this in order to
create collective knowledge for achieving the SDGs.
//
The COVID-19 Pandemic has left many scars, but the opportunities for change that have arisen from this disaster
should be seen as pathways to achieve the SDGs. The realization of global environmental issues such as achieving
"Net Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 2050," the improvement of productivity through remote work, the review
of work styles and the realization of work-life balance, the solution of the problem of part-time employment, the
realization of a circular economy, and the realization of diversity such as the realization of gender equality and the
securing of human rights for foreign nationals are all important issues. The realization of such diversity will be the
key to transforming Japanese society. First of all, the public sector, including the administration of the Diet and civil
servants, taking the lead in promoting such initiatives is expected.
//
On the other hand, while the development of telework, for example, will contribute to the realization of work
styles that are not restricted by location or time, it will be essential to create an environment that does not place a
burden on workers, and in particular, to address the issue of working hour management, where the line between
public and private time tends to be blurred. As we move forward with these changes, we need to be aware of the
negative impacts and take measures to deal with them. For example, it is essential to examine actions from the
perspective of the 17 goals of the SDGs, such as "fair transition" and "labor mobility without unemployment”.
//
Awareness of the SDGs is increasing. Furthermore, interest in the SDGs is growing in the wake of the COVID-19
Pandemic, and this could lead to the spread of products and services that contribute to the achievement of the
SDGs. It is important to use the SDGs as an framework to discuss the values and social changes that underlie them,
such as the vision of the world and Japan in 2030 and 2050, the state of capitalism and social systems, management
philosophies that put the SDGs into practice, the co-building of a peaceful and sustainable society, human rights,
and human well-being. This is not an attempt to standardize values, but rather a movement to turn this into a force
for change by having people recognize each other's diversity. Such discussions will make it easier for citizens,
businesses, and other actors to imagine models for change toward a sustainable society. In so doing, it is especially
beneficial to get the participation of young people who will live in the future and those who are currently in
vulnerable positions. Japan should aim to demonstrate its leadership in the international community by placing the SDGs at the core
of its policies and corporate management, providing more opportunities for the next generation, and building a
model for change to realize a sustainable society
//
The process of preparing the VNR, conducting comprehensive review, and reflecting on our efforts was
meaningful, especially accelerating our efforts for achieving a "better recovery" from the COVID-19 the SDGs. Based
on the discussions with the non-governmental members of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable, civil society, and the
various recommendations obtained from the public comments, Japan would like to proceed with our efforts,
keeping in mind the following points.
//
It is crucial to involve a wide range of stakeholders for promoting the SDGs, and it is essential to have a
mechanism that provides opportunities to reflect the voices of as many stakeholders as possible. In drafting the
VNR, it was reaffirmed that the SDGs Promotion Roundtable, in which key representatives of organizations and
networks working on the SDGs participate, plays a pivotal role in bringing multi-stakeholder voices and perspectives
to reflect on SDGs related policies.
//
In order to reflect the voices of diverse stakeholders in an accurate and timely manner, the Government of Japan
will continue to strive to create opportunities to reflect the voices of as many stakeholders as possible by utilizing
working groups of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable and stakeholder meetings. And in the course of the process, the
Government of Japan will ensure that the discussions of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable will not overlap with the
existing framework of discussions.
//
The Government of Japan will also consider to establish a system that can incorporate the opinions of youth,
since many opinions on reflecting voices of youth were raised in the discussions with the non-governmental
members of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable and civil society, and from the public comments.
//
In discussions with the non-governmental members of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable and civil society and
in the public comments, the need to set out comprehensive and objective goals and science-based targets and
indicators towards the achievement of SDGs was pointed out. 
//
In the course of preparing the VNR, it became clear in which area targets and indicators by 2030 had been set
and developed or not. For example, some measures of the “SDGs Action Plan” have made progress, including
concrete measures incorporated in the “Key Policies for the acceleration of women’s advancement and gender
equality 2021” towards the achievement of the goals in the “Fifth Basic Plan for Gender Equality”, which is
mentioned in Goal 5 (Gender) of the VNR. In order to accurately measure the status of the progress of the SDGs and
steadily improve it, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, Executive Committee, and the SDGs Promotion Roundtable will regularly check the progress of efforts based on the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles and Action Plans,
and review them as necessary, as stipulated in the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles Revised Edition decided
in December 2019. Regarding the specific evaluations to be conducted by each ministry and agency, the Government
of Japan will consider how they should be done, paying attention to the characteristics of each policy to be evaluated.
//
Some ministries and agencies, such as the Ministry of the Environment, have introduced the PDCA cycle for the
consideration of the SDGs, consisting of (1) setting goals on the SDGs, (2) implementing projects, (3) monitoring and
self-assessing performance in relation to the SDGs, and (4) resetting goals for the next fiscal year and implementing
projects. The Government of Japan will consider how to advance this discussion at the SDGs Promotion
Headquarters and other meetings.
In addition, the Government of Japan will consider how to enhance the progress evaluation system and improve
transparency in Japan, based on studies and researches on the implementation systems and status of the review of
global indicators of other countries which are making advanced efforts on the SDGs.
//
As described in this VNR, various local governments have adopted the SDGs approach to solve local problems,
and SDGs localization is considered to be a characteristic of Japan's SDGs promotion. On the other hand, many of
these efforts remain within Japan, and the Government believes that sharing Japan's efforts with other countries
through forums such as the United Nations High-Level Political Forum for Sustainable Development (HLPF) and
deepening cooperation with local governments in other countries will help promote further cooperation and efforts
to achieve the SDGs. 
//
The creation of Voluntary Local Reviews (VLRs) is meaningful in sharing challenges and efforts of local
governments both domestically and internationally, and we would like to encourage implementation of VLRs by
local governments and encourage them to lead international cooperation among local governments.
//
In light of the fact that the domestic awareness of SDGs has exceeded 50% (Source: Dentsu survey for FY2020),
in order to accelerate efforts henceforth, it is necessary for each and every one of us to make the SDGs a personal
matter and promote behavioral changes. In order to create a big wave, national and local governments, businesses,
and citizens should strive to raise awareness in Japan leading to behavioral changes.
//
In drafting this VNR, one of the biggest challenges was to coordinate with a wide range of stakeholders in a short
period of time. In exchanges of opinions with the non-governmental members of the SDGs Promotion Roundtable
and civil society, and in public comments, it was pointed out that, in the future VNR process, it is desirable to
establish a schedule with more time to spare and share that schedule more in advance. The Government of Japan
will consider implementing its next VNR at a desirable timing, taking into account the mid- to long-term progress
evaluation process.
//



