Incorporating the Goals in policy and planning frameworks.
The UK’s approach to Goal delivery reflects its unique 
constitutional arrangements. 
Since 1999, devolution has transformed the way the 
UK is run. The UK Parliament legislates for England 
as well as on reserved issues that cover the whole 
of the UK. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
each have their own legislature and government and 
are responsible for implementing policy in areas of 
devolved competence. Below is a high-level summary 
of some of the policy areas that are broadly devolved 
and reserved in each part of the UK. Each devolution 
settlement is unique and the distinction between 
devolved and reserved powers can sometimes be 
complex.
//
The wider UK family also includes 3 Crown 
Dependencies and 14 Overseas Territories. The 
Crown Dependencies consist of the Isle of Man, the 
Bailiwick of Jersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey. 
The Crown Dependencies are not part of the UK but 
are self-governing dependencies of the Crown. This 
means they have their own directly elected legislative 
assemblies, administrative, fiscal and legal systems 
and their own courts of law. Overseas Territories, such 
as Gibraltar and the Falkland Islands, fall under the 
jurisdiction and sovereignty of the UK. The majority 
are self-governing, with the UK retaining responsibility 
for defence and foreign policy.
//
Single Departmental Plans in the UK.
Following the UK’s key role in the 2015 negotiations 
of the 2030 Agenda and the Goals, the UK 
government published Agenda 2030: Delivering the 
Global Goals (2017) to provide more detail on UK 
government activity to support Goal delivery both 
domestically and internationally.
//
All of the Goals are now reflected throughout 
the UK government’s programme of work
collectively delivering activity on social, economic, 
and environmental issues. Each UK government 
department has embedded the Goals in its Single 
Departmental Plan – an established process to 
focus government efforts on important issues. Each 
department’s Single Departmental Plan outlines 
how planned activity will support the delivery of 
the Goals. These plans are published annually. 
Each department also works with its partners and 
stakeholders to deliver these priorities. The progress of 
activity that supports the Goals is reported publicly in 
Departmental Annual Reports and Accounts, enabling 
scrutiny by Parliament and the public.
//
The Secretary of State for International Development 
has overall leadership and policy oversight for the 
Goals, with the Minister for Implementation in 
Cabinet Office playing an important role in ensuring 
a coordinated cross-government approach to the 
delivery of the Goals. Officials in the UK government’s 
Department for International Development (DFID) 
and the Cabinet Office co-chair a cross-government 
group, which meets regularly and provides a platform 
to coordinate Goal implementation, integrate the 
Goals into departmental activity, and consider 
progress towards their implementation. This group 
also oversaw preparations for the Voluntary National 
Review.
//
The National Performance Framework in Scotland.
Scotland’s National Performance Framework (NPF) is 
the main mechanism for localising and implementing 
the Goals in Scotland. The NPF and the Goals share 
the same aims: encouraging transformational social, 
economic and environmental change to achieve 
increased well-being and a more peaceful and 
prosperous future. The NPF is underpinned by law 
and is intended to inform discussion, collaboration 
and planning of policies and services across Scotland 
– encompassing public sector, businesses, civil 
society and communities. It provides a national 
purpose to create a more successful country with 
opportunities for all to flourish through increased 
well-being and sustainable and inclusive economic 
growth. It highlights the broad National Outcomes 
that support the purpose and provides measures for 
progress. The NPF is also underpinned by values to 
guide Scotland as a society which treats all people 
with kindness, dignity and respect, respects the rule 
of law and acts in an open and transparent way. The 
NPF provides a focus on tackling inequalities so that 
no one in Scotland is left behind. As natural allies 
the NPF embeds the Goals through mapping to the 
National Outcomes. In Scotland the effort is amplified 
by the SDG Network Scotland, an open coalition 
bringing together the voices of over 300 people and 
organisations.
//
The Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015 in Wales.
Wales has a long history of taking action to advance 
sustainable development. In 1998 Wales was one 
of the first nations to put sustainable development 
into its founding legislation. In the lead up to the 
agreement of the Goals, Wales carried out a national 
conversation on ‘The Wales We Want’ to inform its 
ambitions for sustainable development. Since 2015 
Wales’s efforts have been shaped by the ground-breaking Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) 
Act 2015 which puts sustainable development on a 
significantly stronger footing in the legislative and 
policy landscape in Wales.
//
The Act enshrines Wales’s commitment to sustainable 
development and seeks to strengthen efforts to tackle 
key intergenerational challenges, such as climate 
change, poverty and inequalities. The Act localises 
the 17 Goals into domestic legislation through 
Wales’s own 7 sustainable development goals (well-being goals), a legally binding common purpose to 
work towards the 7 well-being goals, the inclusion 
of a culture as a fourth dimension of sustainable 
development, and the establishment of statutory 
partnerships to advance sustainable development. It 
places a duty on public bodies in order for sustainable 
development to be the central organising principle 
of government and specified public bodies in Wales. 
The Act also establishes the world’s first statutory 
independent Future Generations Commissioner for 
Wales to be the guardian of future generations in 
Wales and support the transformation needed. The 
Auditor General for Wales also has obligations to 
examine this change. At a local level, partnerships 
have been formed to plan and deliver long term 
change across communities in Wales through Public 
Services Boards.
//
Using legislation to drive positive action is Wales’s 
blueprint for localising the Goals, and whilst most of 
the initial efforts have been focussed on those public 
bodies subject to the Act, civil society, businesses 
and the wider public sector are playing a key role in 
implementing Agenda 2030.
//
The draft Programme for Government in Northern Ireland.
Northern Ireland has incorporated the three 
dimensions of sustainable development; economic, 
social and environmental, into the Northern Ireland 
Civil Service (NICS) strategic plans, rather than 
through separate sustainability strategies. This has 
resulted in the principles of sustainable development 
being embedded in the Northern Ireland Executive’s 
highest- level strategy, the draft Programme for 
Government (PfG). The approach to sustainable 
development and the UK Voluntary National Review in 
Northern Ireland has therefore been through the draft 
Programme for Government.
//
Around the world.
The UK’s development expertise and commitment 
to spending 0,7% of gross national income (GNI) on 
Official Development Assistance (ODA) means it is 
one of the leading international contributors to the 
Goals. The UK Aid Strategy (2015) sets out how the 
UK uses its development and diplomatic leadership 
to address some of the most pressing issues that the 
world faces, including the fight against disease, the 
empowerment of women and supporting a reduction 
in global carbon emissions – by putting international 
development at the heart of UK national security and 
foreign policy.
//
Under the UK’s devolution settlement, international 
relations remain the responsibility of the UK 
government. 
However, the devolved administrations 
can choose to allocate funds to development 
programmes that contribute to overall UK ODA 
spend.
//
Scotland places great importance on being a good 
global citizen. This means playing a part in tackling 
global challenges including poverty, injustice and 
inequality. In 2016, following a public consultation, 
the Scottish Government published Global 
Citizenship: Scotland’s International Development 
Strategy, which sets out Scotland’s contribution to the 
international community and is specifically designed 
to align with the Goals. The Strategy is focussed on 
four partner countries: Malawi, Rwanda, Zambia and 
Pakistan; and has an International Development Fund 
to support and empower those four partner countries.
//
Wales has, through its Well-being of Future 
Generations (Wales) Act 2015, set a well-being goal 
for ‘a globally responsible Wales.’ This is described 
in law as ‘a nation which, when doing anything 
to improve the economic, social, environmental 
and cultural well-being of Wales, takes account of 
whether doing such a thing may make a positive 
contribution to global well-being.’ Ways of measuring 
this goal include National Indicator 14 ‘The 
Ecological Footprint of Wales’. Work to deliver this 
goal includes the Wales for Africa Grant Scheme, a 
flagship initiative enabling community groups and 
organisations in Wales to access funding for smallscale projects that contribute to Wales’s delivery of the 
Goals and deliver benefits to Wales and Africa.
//
Delivering the Goals through shared endeavour.
The 2030 Agenda is not just for and about 
government initiatives; it involves many stakeholders 
including the private sector, civil society, local 
communities and individuals. For example, the 
UK Parliament has carried out a number of 
inquiries on the Goals and their delivery, including 
the International Development Committee, the 
Environmental Audit Committee, and the Women 
and Equalities Committee. The All-Party Parliamentary 
Group on the United Nations Global Goals for 
Sustainable Development (APPG) also brings together 
Members of Parliament to discuss and promote the 
Goals.
//
Many sectors are making substantial efforts to raise 
awareness, form partnerships and use opportunities 
in the UK and globally to deliver the Goals, going 
beyond “business as usual” to make a real impact. 
Through partnerships and as guided by the Addis 
Ababa Action Agenda, both public and private 
funding will be necessary to achieve the Goals.
//
This chapter explores in further detail the roles of 
three UK sectors whose work contributes to delivering 
the Goals. It is intended to provide examples of nongovernment activity from across the UK, rather than 
being an exhaustive list.
//
Civil Society. 
Civil society is at the heart of the UK’s communities. 
A healthy, independent and influential civil society 
is a hallmark of a thriving democracy and key to 
leaving no one behind. The UK’s civil society is highly 
respected internationally and is looked to as a model 
for creating an enabling environment for civil society 
to thrive.
//
Through the UN’s Economic and Social Council 
(ECOSOC), civil society organisations played an active 
role in shaping the Goals, and they continue to play 
an even more critical role in communicating and 
implementing them.
//
How is UK civil society contributing to the Goals? 
UK civil society contributes in a number of ways 
including: 
• direct implementation, through their programmes 
and services. 
• raising awareness, both at home and overseas, 
through campaigns and community engagement. 
• reviewing progress toward achieving the Goals and 
holding government to account. 
• working collaboratively with other sectors to 
achieve the Goals.
//
Civil society is central to tackling big societal 
challenges and thus achieving the Goals. In 2018, the 
UK government published the Civil Society Strategy 
(2018). The Strategy set out a bold new vision for 
how government will work with and support civil 
society in the long term. The Strategy is encouraging 
people, organisations and businesses to help make 
a difference; it is the beginning of an ambitious, 
evolving programme to help build a strong society 
and future for the UK that works for everyone.
//
The UK’s civil society organisations also do 
extraordinary work around the world to support 
delivery of the Goals, in some of the most challenging 
settings. From delivering life-saving assistance when 
disaster strikes, to addressing the underlying causes 
of deprivation, they have led the way in innovating 
and in challenging existing ways of working in 
development in order to strengthen efforts to end 
extreme poverty, reach the most marginalised, and 
deliver on the 2030 Agenda. In early 2019, the UK 
government confirmed new funding to make it easier 
for small charities and humanitarian organisations to 
access the UK aid budget and support delivery of the 
Goals.
//
Examples of good practice. 
In the UK, civil society coalitions such as the UK 
Stakeholders for Sustainable Development (UKSSD) 
and Bond international development network play an 
important role in driving domestic and international 
implementation of the Goals and sustainable 
development more broadly. For example, the UKSSD 
network, which includes over 1,000 partners from 
a range of sectors, works to ‘inspire, influence and 
inform people, communities and organisations to 
transform the UK into a truly sustainable society’. 
Many individual civil society organisations across the 
UK are also working to raise awareness of the Goals 
in their local communities.
//
Volunteers are making a critical contribution to the 
delivery of the Goals and there is growing recognition 
of the importance of volunteering for development 
outcomes, including the Goals. Official estimates 
indicate that volunteering contributes 2,4% to global 
gross domestic product (GDP), 
and the United 
Nations Volunteer programme estimated in 2018 
that across the world one billion people are giving up 
their time to volunteer. 
In the UK, there is emerging 
evidence of the contribution that volunteers are 
making to deliver the Goals. For example, research by 
the Kings Fund in 2013 highlighted the contribution 
of the 3 million volunteers who support health and 
social care organisations, including 78,000 volunteers 
in acute hospitals across England, who together 
contribute more than 13 million hours a year.
//
Volunteering can play an important role in helping to 
further strengthen people’s ownership of the Goals 
and contributes, in different ways, to achieving the 
Goals. The UK government’s vision, as articulated in 
the Civil Society Strategy (2018), is for people from 
all backgrounds and of all ages to be able to thrive, 
connect with each other, and give back to their 
communities – building an integrated society that 
works for everyone, in which people have a sense of 
control over their future and that of their community.
//
The UK remains at or near the top of the global 
league tables for philanthropy and volunteering, with 
people in the UK giving more to charitable causes 
than any other country in Europe,
 and the majority 
of the population volunteering, in some way, over 
the course of a year. In 2017-18, 64% of people 
in England took part in a volunteering activity at 
least once. 
Volunteers are also making a significant 
contribution to the UK’s international development 
programmes overseas, for example, through the UK 
aid-funded International Citizen Service programme.
//
Business and the private sector.
The UK business community has long been considered 
a leader in ethical and responsible business practice. 
Now, under the banner of the Goals, UK business has 
both the opportunity and obligation to make an even 
more profound commitment to wider society.
//
The UK’s Industrial Strategy (2019) prioritises long-term business growth as central to national prosperity, 
and the Civil Society Strategy (2018) sets out a 
vision for supporting responsible business as a force 
for good in UK society. Responsible businesses are 
essential to building a stronger society that works for 
everyone and, as outlined in the Civil Society Strategy, 
the UK’s leading businesses increasingly put social and 
environmental responsibility at the heart of what they 
do.
//
Why should business contribute to the Goals? 
Evidence continues to mount that commitment from 
business is not just good for society, it is good for 
business. Across key stakeholder groups, expectations 
are rising that businesses should clearly demonstrate 
their contribution to sustainable development. For 
example, in the UK 62% of prospective employees 
have a strong expectation that their employer 
will have a “greater purpose”, and their job “a 
meaningful societal impact”, 
and 79% of the public 
agree that “CEOs should take the lead on change 
rather than waiting for government to impose 
it”. 
Businesses whose core activities contribute 
to sustainable development not only realise their 
stakeholders’ expectations, but future-proof their 
business and enhance their long-term commercial 
performance as well. For example, 70% of turnover 
growth at Unilever last year was driven by its 
sustainable brands; this was the fourth consecutive 
year that they had out-performed average growth.
//
For businesses, the Goals offer value in two key ways.
• As a strategic framework to help the business 
future-proof against the risks of not meeting the 
Goals and pursue the business opportunities that 
achieving them will unlock. 
• As a universally recognised brand to clearly signal 
their commitment to sustainable development to 
stakeholders.
//
Technology offers unprecedented opportunities to 
rethink the way in which the Goals are tackled. The 
UK’s technology sector has the potential to play a 
leading role in this. London is the acknowledged 
centre of Europe’s tech sector, producing one in five 
of the continent’s fast-growing technology unicorns 
with a value of £118 billion (US$148 billion), and 
from 2013 to 2018, the UK received £28 billion 
(US$35 billion) of venture capital investment in tech. 
This extraordinary acceleration of the UK’s tech sector 
has happened for many reasons. The UK has four of 
the world’s top 10 universities and produces more 
than 5,000 Science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM) PhDs each year. World-class 
expertise in Artificial Intelligence and deep tech, as 
well as advanced robotics, advanced manufacturing 
and automotive experts are contributing to 
responsible, sustainable growth.
//
Achieving the Goals has a clear business rationale. The 
Business and Sustainable Development Commission 
(BSDC) estimates that globally in four economic 
sectors alone (food and agriculture, cities, energy 
and materials, and health and well-being), achieving 
the Goals has the potential to open up US$12 trillion 
of market opportunities, in turn creating up to 380 
million jobs a year by 2030.
//
How is UK business contributing to the Goals? 
In mid-2018, the UK Government commissioned 
Deloitte to assess the current level of UK business 
engagement with the Goals. Engagement with the 
Goals was defined as the degree to which businesses 
integrate a commitment to sustainable development 
into their core activities, and the degree to which 
they use the Goals to do so.
//
Through this study, Deloitte characterised four 
engagement archetypes.
• Not engaged: Business activity is not linked to 
sustainable development. 
• Explorers: Some business activity is linked to 
sustainable development or the Goals.
• Fellow travellers: Sustainable development is core 
to the business model, but Goals are not referenced 
or deployed.
• Champions: Sustainable development is core to 
the business model, and linked to the Goals.
//
They then assessed a sample of UK businesses and 
providers of capital16 to map the current landscape 
(see diagram on page 16). The study showed that 
UK public businesses are the most engaged with the 
Goals, with the majority making a public commitment 
to the Goals agenda and over half beginning to 
align their business activity to the Goals. Few private 
businesses championed the Goals, although many 
were highly engaged with sustainable development. 
However, over half were beginning to explore 
how they could contribute to both the Goals and 
sustainable development.
//
Small- and medium-sized-enterprises (SMEs) evaluated 
had extremely low levels of Goal awareness, despite 
22% of SMEs serving a social mission and the 
growth in new business models such as Certified 
B Corporations that align to a common shared 
purpose. Those businesses that were engaging 
noted that the Goals brought value to conversations 
with partners and clients. Investors were highly 
engaged with sustainable development, often using 
environmental and social indicators to support 
responsible investment decisions.
//
The UK Government is currently leading research to 
better understand how people want their savings, 
pensions and investments to be invested and what 
opportunities for responsible investment they would 
like to see.
//
Engagement is also evidenced through reporting 
initiatives, such as Shift’s UN Guiding Principles 
Reporting Framework, designed to increase reporting 
and investor interest in human rights. Similarly to 
public businesses, just under half of investors used 
the Goals to signal their commitment to stakeholders. 
They also used the Goals as a thematic guide to 
channel impact investments and support long-term 
investment decision making. While they did not 
measure impact directly against the Goals, 22% of 
investors linked their existing reporting frameworks 
to the Goals. Investors most highly engaged with 
the Goals were large institutional investors, national 
Development Finance Institutions and smaller funds 
specialising in sustainable investing.
//
Examples of good practice.
Where businesses do engage with the Goals as a tool 
to deliver impact, they deploy them as a:
• signal of their commitment to sustainable 
development.
• thematic framework to enable strategic choice, 
collaboration or innovation.
• tool to support non-financial reporting.
• framework for direct financing eg for climate
resilience, or by investing in businesses and projects 
that are providing solutions to one or more of the 
Goals. It is estimated that there is a US$2,5 trillion 
annual investment gap to achieve the Goals in the 
developing world, and injections of private sector 
funding will be essential in narrowing this gap.
//
There are also a range of resources already available 
to help businesses begin to engage more deeply, 
including the UN Global Compact Network UK’s 
Sustainable Development Goal Roadshow aimed 
at stimulating Goal-related business action and 
partnerships across the UK. Some businesses are 
increasingly using tools to measure their impact, for 
example the World Benchmarking Alliance, comparing 
corporate performance against the Goals.
//
Local delivery. 
The UK’s cities, local authorities and local partners 
play a key role in supporting delivery of the Goals 
in the UK, while helping to ensure no-one, and no 
community, is left behind. It is estimated that 65% of 
the 169 Global Targets need local stakeholders to be 
involved if they are to be achieved. There are great 
examples of local communities taking responsibility 
for sustainable development and reaching out to help 
others do so too.
//
How are local actors contributing to the Goals? 
Local authorities are often responsible for many of 
the services and environments people interact with 
daily. From providing social care (Goal 3) to safe 
education (Goal 4) to effective transport planning 
(Goal 11), local authorities are vital to the domestic 
delivery of the Goals. In return, the Goals offer an 
effective framework to support local authorities with 
developing plans, strategies and supporting overall 
progress on sustainable development.
//
Local authorities are well placed to provide the vital 
link between local communities and businesses and 
the Goals by connecting local priorities with the 
Goals and raising awareness of their importance 
amongst stakeholders. They can also reflect the needs 
and unique circumstances of their residents and 
communities to ensure resources are directed in the 
most effective ways.
//
Using their position as a bridge between national 
government, civil society, businesses and citizens, local 
authorities can convene and support networks of 
domestic and international partners. This can amplify 
their efforts significantly and ensure best practice is 
shared with partners around the world.
//
Cities have the potential to make great strides in 
support of the Goals through the promotion of 
sustainable consumption, environmental sustainability 
and social inclusion. For example, the London 
Sustainable Development Commission provides 
independent advice to the Mayor of London on 
sustainable development. Other cities in the UK 
are being used as hubs to coordinate action and 
encourage cross-sector engagement.
//
Community, neighbourhood, parish and town 
councils across the UK can also engage with citizens 
at a micro-level and develop a grassroots approach 
to sustainable development. Their work helps to 
improve the quality of life of local populations and 
environments while their strong links to communities 
are essential for the Leave No One Behind agenda.
//
Next steps.
Within all three sectors, awareness of the Goals 
is varied. Whilst momentum is building across the 
UK, with more and more partners recognising the 
economic and societal value of a commitment to the 
Goals, further work is needed.
//
There are a range of opportunities for all sectors 
to further increase their support for and delivery of 
Goals. In addition, more could be done to better 
engage civil society, businesses and local partners to 
increase awareness of the Goals and the opportunities 
they present both in the UK and globally; and to 
provide support and continued advice on how sectors 
can deeply and practically contribute to delivery of the 
Goals.
//
Using Data and tracking progress towards the Goals.
The UK played an integral role in the negotiation of 
the Goals’ indicator framework, with the UK National 
Statistician chairing the UN Statistical Commission in 
2015/16. The UK is one of a few countries to report 
data on more than 70% of the Global Indicators. 
The UK is also collaborating with other countries to 
develop statistical capacity and share expertise, and 
to help others measure progress towards the Goals. 
Across networks of statisticians, researchers, analysts 
and data scientists, the UK is committed to finding 
innovative solutions to the measurement challenges 
all countries face in monitoring progress on this 
ambitious agenda.
//
The importance of data. 
“All of the core activities of government involve 
data, including making decisions on individual cases; 
tracking the outcomes of policies; and deciding on 
the need for new policies.“
“And these data serve a wider public purpose 
too: helping a huge range of people (citizens, 
parliamentarians, media, businesses, voluntary 
organisations) make sense of the world and make 
important decisions in their work and their life.”
//
Good quality, timely and comprehensive data show 
what is happening in society, the economy and the 
environment all around the world. For the first time, 
under the 2030 Agenda, developed and developing 
countries are working toward the same Global 
Targets and Indicators. Unless otherwise specified, this 
chapter uses ‘indicator’ to mean ‘Global Indicator’.
//
With pioneering data innovations and diverse 
collection methods, the UK has one of the world’s 
largest and most developed data systems.
//
Current reporting by the UK.
With responsibility for collating UK data for the 
indicators, the UK’s Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
is committed to sourcing data that gives the clearest 
picture of the UK’s contribution to the Goals and 
checking the validity of the data using the UK Code of 
Practice for Statistics. 
As of June 2019, the ONS reports UK data on 180 
(74%) indicators of the total 244.
//
This data is reported on the ONS’ National Reporting 
Platform in an open and transparent way, showing 
the indicators the UK has data for, their data source 
and any other relevant information. The National 
Reporting Platform may not always use the same 
data source as the UK’s Voluntary National Review. 
For example, while the Global Indicator 3.4.1 asks 
about deaths related to non-communicable diseases 
including diabetes, the Voluntary National Review 
looks at those at risk of developing diabetes because 
this information is more useful in the UK when 
considering preventative measures.
//
The National Reporting Platform aims to report data 
which meet the global metadata for each indicator as 
closely as possible, whereas other data sources may 
be more relevant in a UK context.
//
Inclusive, disaggregated data.
Timely, comprehensive and disaggregated (broken 
down) data is necessary to achieve leaving no one 
behind and to make the invisible visible. Data is 
only disaggregated in a way that does not identify 
individuals, in accordance with the UK Code of 
Practice for Statistics but draws attention to the 
groups who may need the most support. Highlighting 
these vulnerable groups will help decision makers and 
civil society organisations to understand who is at risk
of being left behind, to develop targeted, effective 
policies and programmes.
//
Of the 180 indicators for which UK data is being 
reported, over 70% are disaggregated by at least one 
variable. The UK is committed to filling disaggregation 
gaps and plans to disaggregate data for the Goals 
by: age, sex, disability status, ethnicity, income, 
geography and migratory status, wherever possible.19
This commitment is outlined in the Inclusive Data 
Action Plan (2018). This action plan was developed by 
the ONS in collaboration with the Global Partnership 
for Sustainable Development Data (GPSDD) Leave No 
One Behind Data Collaborative.
//
Some indicators specify additional disaggregations, 
for example, pregnant women, or industry sector. 
The UK disaggregates data by other characteristics, 
where relevant; for example, the ONS is reporting 
disaggregated data on domestic abuse by sexual 
identity (Global Indicator 5.2.1).
//
Innovative data collection methods. 
A programme of transformation across the UK 
Government Statistical Service aims to increase 
impact and reach of statistical data. In line with this 
transformation, and to meet changing user needs, 
the ONS plans to use new and innovative types of 
data, such as Earth observation. Earth observation 
describes a wide set of data collection tools (such 
as meteorological stations) that describe the Earth’s 
surface but is usually used to describe satellite 
imagery. The ONS plans to use administrative data to 
report on some of the Global Indicators. This data is 
built up through daily activities and record keeping. 
Examples include health records and tax data.
//
With the introduction of the Digital Economy Act 
2017 there will be an increase in the type and 
amount of data that the ONS can access, including 
administrative data and big data. This will help with 
the development of new ways of measuring UK 
progress towards the Goals. It will enable the ONS to 
bring together information from numerous sources, 
which could be linked and allow the UK to carry out 
more detailed research. This can also provide further 
break downs to help highlight the groups who are 
being left behind. For example, linking deaths from 
suicide data to higher education data provided new 
information about student deaths.20 As the ONS 
starts to use more administrative and non-official data 
sources, and innovative data types, the UK will be 
able to report more of the characteristics required for 
disaggregation.
//
Non-Official Data.
Organisations and businesses own or collect data 
which can be a rich source of information that can 
be used to complement government data. A good 
example is the use of the data that the company 
LINK owns about cash machine locations and 
characteristics. Through the Digital Economy Act 
2017, the ONS is working with LINK, to get access 
to detailed data which can then be used to analyse 
where cashpoints are and what functions they have, 
such as how accessible they are to those living in rural 
communities, or whether they have technology to 
assist partially sighted people. This approach is helping 
to provide data for indicators and disaggregations 
that the ONS currently are unable to report.
//
To ensure the robustness of data from non-official 
sources, the ONS is applying the UK Code of Practice 
for Statistics which sets the standards for official 
statistics to ensure the public can have confidence in 
them.
//
Geographical coverage. 
The UK’s devolution arrangements mean that 
data availability and definitions have diverged, as 
statisticians in devolved administrations collect and 
produce data that best meet the needs of the local 
policy context. This means that compiling data for the 
whole of the UK can be a challenge in some areas. 
The UK is working towards reporting data from across 
the whole of the UK and statisticians from across the 
UK are working with the ONS to consider the best 
way of achieving that outcome. Nevertheless, the fact 
that data is collected in the UK in different ways, to 
suit different policy requirements, is in line with the 
spirit of the Goals.
//
Challenges and next steps.
Access to, and a general lack of, appropriate data is 
the main challenge to fully reporting on UK progress 
towards the Goals. This can take many forms and is 
not a challenge unique to the UK.
//
UN Tier data.
The ONS is currently reporting UK data on 83% of 
the UN Tier 1 indicators. The full 100% cannot be 
reported on because in some cases the data is not 
routinely collected in the UK, such as the prevalence 
of stunting (impaired growth and development in 
children). In cases like this, the ONS is working with 
topic experts to identify the best data source available 
to the UK.
//
Where indicators are not accompanied by agreed 
methods and/or standards (UN Tier 3), it can be 
difficult to report progress towards them. However, 
the ONS is using proxy data to report data for 47% 
of UN Tier 3 indicators, details of which can be found 
in the Statistical Annex. In these instances, the ONS 
reports the most relevant source of data based on 
the indicator title. The data for these indicators will 
be reassessed once global methodologies are agreed. 
The ONS is contributing to the development of these 
methodologies. For example, Global Indicator 9.1.1 
(proportion of the rural population who live within 2 
km of an all-season road). The methodology for this 
indicator was developed by the ONS in 2018 through 
collaboration with Ordnance Survey (OS). As OS data 
is not available in other countries, work is continuing 
to identify potential data sources that could provide 
globally-consistent estimates for this indicator.
//
New data.
Stakeholder feedback during the development of 
the Voluntary National Review has shown that the 
UK needs to source better data to fully understand 
interlinkages between the Goals, Global Targets and 
Global Indicators, for example, where those in poverty 
may be more likely to have poorer health.
//
Over the next year, the ONS plans to:
• introduce mechanisms for data exchange. 
• identify new methods and innovations for data 
collection. 
• look at the economic case for the Goals in a project 
designed to engage university students in the 2030 
Agenda. 
• work on interlinkages between Global Targets 
based on user research. 
• strengthen user research activities by having larger-scale user research, usability testing and accessibility 
testing of the National Reporting Platform.
//
Data used in the Voluntary National Review.
In the UK-focussed parts of the Voluntary National 
Review, the following data sources have been used:
• Global Indicator data where appropriate. This data 
can be explored further in the Statistical Annex or 
via the National Reporting Platform. The Global 
Indicators have been produced for both developing 
and developed countries, so they do not cover 
everything that is relevant in the UK. 
• other government sources are drawn upon 
throughout the Voluntary National Review to fill 
the data gaps left by the Global Indicators – such 
as statistics on the Gender Pay Gap. This paints a 
fuller picture of UK progress towards the Goals. 
These statistics are communicated in the chapters 
via detailed narrative and data picture boxes. A link 
to the data source is provided. 
• some non-government sources to add objectivity 
and contextual information. Examples of nongovernmental data used include comparison to 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development’s (OECD) international education 
survey and use of Waste and Resource Action 
Programme (WRAP) data on the amount of food 
waste.
//
Wherever possible, the data used is sourced or 
calculated from publicly-available documents, in such 
a way that members of the public could reproduce 
the figures. Decisions on data use, such as how best 
to balance the relevance and public availability of data 
sources, have been made by the statisticians in each 
nation.
The Voluntary National Review is a snapshot in time. 
Source links can be used to investigate updated data.
//
Data relating to Scotland draws on the most 
appropriate and relevant data to describe 
performance and challenges in realising the Goals, 
Scotland’s National Performance Framework (NPF) 
indicator data features throughout this Voluntary 
National Review where it effectively highlights 
performance and challenges in realising the Goals. 
In addition, data from official and non-government 
sources has been identified to supplement NPF 
indicator data on specific targets and issues where 
it is important to illustrate progress with data closely 
matching the relevant Goal, Target or Indicator. The 
UK’s Voluntary National Review does not reflect all 
relevant Scottish specific data, this can be found in 
the Scottish Supplementary Review here: 
www.nationalperformance.gov.scot.
//
In Wales, the measurement framework for sustainable 
development is set out through the Well-being of 
Future Generations Act. This mechanism ensures that 
Welsh Ministers are monitoring progress towards the 
seven statutory well-being goals through 46 national 
well-being indicators and the annual Well-being of 
Wales 2017-18 report. These also provide the context 
for understanding Welsh progress against the Goals 
using the indicators that are most relevant to Wales 
and that were developed through significant public 
engagement. The Well-being of Wales 2017-18 report 
from September 2018 has been drawn heavily upon 
for this report and hence some of the data may not 
be the most recently available.
//
Welsh statisticians have developed an online tool to 
illustrate how these national indicators map against 
the Goals demonstrating that there is good coverage 
across the Goals. Within the annual Well-being of 
Wales report, statisticians also draw on a range of 
data sources (both official statistics and otherwise) to 
develop a rounded narrative of well-being and other 
aspects of the Goals.
//
The Northern Ireland contributions to the Voluntary 
National Review draw on Northern Ireland’s draft 
Programme for Government (PfG) Indicators. A 
mapping exercise has been carried out to highlight 
how the draft PfG (12 Outcomes and 49 population 
Indicators) aligns with the Goals. The monitoring 
arrangements for the draft PfG will show how 
Northern Ireland is progressing towards the Goals. 
Northern Ireland’s data can be investigated further 
using the Outcomes Viewer.
//
UK action around the world .
The UK is a global leader in data and is at the 
forefront of supporting statistical capacity building 
around the world:
• At the country level: the UK supports countries 
in strengthening and modernising their national 
statistical systems to enable them to gather and 
analyse good quality disaggregated data. This 
includes programmes in Nepal and Malawi and 
strategic partnerships, through the ONS, in Ghana, 
Kenya, Rwanda and the UN Economic Commission 
for Africa. These partnerships are progressing well 
and the ONS is now expanding this work to more 
countries.
• At the global Level: the UK is pressing the 
international system to coordinate support for data 
and to align behind the priorities of countries they 
are supporting. The UK is working on common 
priorities across countries, including:
• a Goal monitoring programme operating in 
19 countries. 
• the ‘Statistics for Results Facility’ which includes 
eight countries. 
• work on economic and agricultural statistics. 
• a geospatial programme aiming to improve 
population estimates.
//
The UK supports co-ordination bodies such as 
PARIS21 which work with national statistics offices 
to develop strategies, gain funding for them 
and share good practice. The UK also backs the 
Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
Data (GPSDD), a network of governments, private 
sector, and civil society organisations dedicated to 
harnessing the data revolution to achieve the Goals. 
The ONS is supporting other countries by explaining 
how data are collected and how relevant sources 
are selected from a variety of different places, 
including using non-official data and creating new 
methodologies.
• Through innovation: The UK supports innovations 
that have the potential to be transformative, 
including the use of satellite imagery and big data 
for improved population estimates.
//
The UK government’s Department for International 
Development’s (DFID) Inclusive Data Action Plan 
(2019) sets out how the UK will achieve the vision 
of the Inclusive Data Charter (2018) that the Goals 
“should be disaggregated, where relevant by income, 
sex, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability 
and geographic location, or other characteristics, in 
accordance with the Fundamental Principles of Official 
Statistics” General Assembly Resolution 68/261. The 
UK advocates for and supports partner countries in 
undertaking national censuses and to build their civil 
vital registration systems as a fundamental building 
block to assist all types of data disaggregation.
//
UK engagement on age statistics and age-disaggregation has been instrumental in bringing 
together a coalition of committed partners. The ONS, 
with help from DFID, has led on the establishment of 
a new international group to improve data on ageing 
and age disaggregation – the Titchfield City Group on 
Ageing and Age-disaggregated Data. This was agreed 
by the UN Statistical Commission in March 2018 and 
will play a leading role in driving quality in ageing and 
age-disaggregated data systems around the world.
//
Meeting the promise to Leave No One Behind
The UK played a key role in ensuring that Leave No 
One Behind became a core principle of the Goals, and 
pledged to put the last first by ensuring that;
• every person has a fair opportunity in life no matter 
who or where they are;
• people who are furthest behind, who have least 
opportunity, and who are the most excluded are 
prioritised; and
• every person counts and will be counted.
//
This commitment to Leave No One Behind reflects the 
value placed on each and every individual across the 
world, irrespective of sex, disability, age, race, religion 
or belief, or sexual orientation. It is a recognition 
that when people are marginalised or excluded, 
societies are less stable and economies are weaker. 
When people are left behind, everyone suffers the 
consequences.
//
At all levels the UK works to understand who, where, 
and why people are being left behind; include people 
by delivering targeted programmes and services to 
those who are seldom heard; and empower people 
to be agents of change by working with others to 
challenge discrimination and harmful social norms.
//
Understanding who is being left behind. 
Access to good quality disaggregated data enables 
decision-makers to understand who is being left 
behind (or is at risk of being left behind) and support 
the development of inclusive policies.
//
For example, the Race Disparity Audit (led by UK 
government) is challenging society to “explain or 
change” disparities in how people from different 
backgrounds are being treated by public services. 
Findings from this Audit indicated that women 
from Pakistani or Bangladeshi backgrounds are the 
least likely to be employed. Using these findings, 
combined with data on areas with high levels of 
ethnic minority unemployment, some Jobcentres have 
implemented local plans to tackle this and other issues 
identified in the Audit. For example, in Birmingham, 
Pakistani and Bangladeshi women have been offered 
1-2-1 employment drop in services to help them move 
into work or take up training.
//
Including those being left behind. 
Ensuring that everyone is included in economies, 
societies, institutions and service provisions requires 
government, employers, local authorities and 
individuals to step up.
//
For example, the Loneliness Strategy in England 
seeks to tackle the drivers of loneliness through 
a cross-government fund that has supported 126 
organisations to tackle loneliness, as well as the 
development of 60 new policies by making changes 
to organisations, infrastructure and culture. Many of 
these policies seek to tackle loneliness, particularly 
among at risk groups, including:
• Children and young people – Primary and 
secondary school children in England will be taught 
how to build healthy relationships and understand 
the impact of loneliness, particularly on mental 
health. 
• Disabled people, people with poor health or longterm illness, and carers – All local health and care 
systems in England will be helped to implement 
social prescribing connector schemes by 2023. 
Social prescribing connects people to community 
groups and services through connector schemes 
where ‘link workers’ introduce people to nearby 
support based on their individual needs. 
• Isolated Older People – A collaboration between 
the UK government, Royal Mail, private enterprise, 
local authorities and the local voluntary sector will 
trial ‘Safe and Connected’. This innovative digital 
solution will see postal workers calling on lonely 
older people who sign up to participate, as part of 
their usual delivery rounds. Postal workers will ask a 
standard set of questions to assess individual needs. 
Answers will then be analysed by a professional 
who will direct the individual to friends, family, or 
local voluntary sector services, as necessary.
//
Empowering those being left behind
In order to spur meaningful change, vulnerable 
and excluded groups must be given the tools and 
opportunities they need to change their own lives. 
Greater participation in the community, the economy 
and in local decision-making by those who are 
disadvantaged, is an essential ingredient for sustained 
growth and prosperity.
//
For example, in England the Integration Area 
Programme is working with five local authorities to 
produce locally-focussed integration strategies. This 
includes Walsall Council which is creating an English 
Language Intelligence Unit that will act as a single 
point of contact linking those in Walsall who speak 
English as their second language to appropriate 
English language courses. Improving English language 
skills is crucial to supporting and empowering 
potential learners to access the services they need, 
including employment opportunities.
//
nternationally, the UK prioritises work that targets 
the most vulnerable and disadvantaged, the most 
excluded, those caught in crises and those most at 
risk of violence and discrimination. The Voice and 
Accountability Programme in Pakistan – AAWAZ – has 
contributed to more open, inclusive and accountable 
governance in two provinces in Pakistan by protecting 
and expanding public spaces for poor and excluded 
people, especially women, minority groups and 
transgender people in 4,500 villages. Now over 
30,000 women hold leadership and decision-making 
positions in citizen groups and networks, as members 
of local women’s assemblies, change-makers, peace-connectors and youth leaders.
//
Devolved administrations.
Scotland’s National Performance Framework (NPF)
has reducing inequalities at its heart. A range of 
legislation, plans and policies in Scotland support 
the agenda to Leave No One Behind. Building on 
the Public Sector Equality Duty, the Fairer Scotland 
Duty was introduced in April 2018. It places a legal 
responsibility on the Scottish Government and a range 
of public bodies in Scotland to actively consider how 
they can reduce inequalities of outcomes caused by 
socio-economic disadvantage, when making strategic 
decisions. This is supported by the Equality Evidence 
Finder - a key resource for finding equality evidence to 
inform decision-making.
//
 ‘A more equal Wales’ is one of seven well-being 
goals in the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) 
Act 2015. This sets out an ambition for ‘a society that 
enables people to fulfil their potential no matter what 
their background or circumstance’. When working 
towards this goal, public bodies in Wales are expected 
to work in a way that involves the full diversity of 
people from across society. Locating fair work within 
the aim to make Wales a more equal society is vitally 
important. The definition of fair work in the recently 
published Fair Work Wales (2019) report will help 
inform the actions needed to achieve the seven well-being goals.
//
In Northern Ireland, the Outcomes Delivery Plan is 
prepared around 12 outcomes in key areas of societal 
and economic well-being. It sets out how the work of 
the Northern Ireland Civil Service (NICS) will contribute 
to the objective of ‘improving well-being for all – by 
tackling disadvantage and driving economic growth’.
//
The UK is committed to addressing poverty in all its 
dimensions and believes that, in the long run, the 
cycle of inter-generational poverty can only be broken 
through a focus on the root causes of poverty.
//
Poverty data and measurement.
The UK has long been at the forefront of 
understanding and measuring poverty and invests 
significant resources in maintaining and improving 
a rich set of data on household income, wealth and 
opportunities.
//
Working age households. 
Working age poverty rates in the UK have reduced 
slightly since 2009 for absolute poverty and have been 
broadly stable for relative poverty.
//
Child poverty and lone parent families.
Absolute and relative child poverty rates have been 
broadly stable in the UK over the past decade. 
Child poverty rates are markedly higher in the UK in 
lone parent families, 86% of which are headed by 
women. In 2017/18, 47% of children in lone parent 
households were in relative poverty after housing costs 
(AHC) compared to 25% of children in households 
made up of couples. The UK recognises the barriers 
lone parents face in working full-time, particularly 
in accessing suitable and affordable childcare. To 
address this, the UK invests in free and subsidised 
childcare, including offering a reimbursement of up 
to 85% of childcare costs in Universal Credit, a 20% 
top up to childcare costs through Tax-Free Childcare 
and spending around £3.5 billion on early education 
entitlements in England.
//
Disabled people.
Health and disability issues affect the working lives of 
millions of people, with around 18% of working-age 
UK adults reporting having a disability. Individuals 
in families with a disabled member face a higher risk 
of poverty than households without any disabled 
members. The UK government’s 2019/20 spending on 
the main disability benefits – Personal Independence 
Payment (PIP), Disability Living Allowance (DLA) and 
Attendance Allowance – is forecast to be over £6 
billion higher in real terms than in 2009/10, and more 
than £2 billion higher than in 2015/16 (see Goal 10).
//
Pensioners
Around 18% of the UK population were aged 65+ in 
mid-2017 and this is projected to increase to over 20% 
by 2027 according to the ONS population estimates. 
For pensioners, a commitment is in place until 2020, 
guaranteeing that the basic and new State Pensions 
will rise by the highest of average earnings growth, 
price inflation, or 2.5%. In 2018/19 the increase was 
3%. From 2015/16 to 2019/20 the value of the 
basic state pension increased by 11.4% (£115.95 to 
£129.20).
//
In terms of public spending in the UK, including 
additional investment in the National Health Service 
in England, the poorest 10% of households in the UK 
receive over 70% more than the richest 10%. Not all 
public spending is captured in income-based measures.
//
Welfare reform and fiscal policy.
The UK government is part-way through the biggest 
welfare reform programme for a generation. Universal 
Credit is replacing the six main means-tested benefits 
and tax credits with one single, monthly payment. 
Strong employment incentives are reinforced by 
the National Living Wage and the rising Personal 
Tax Allowance, which work together to promote 
independence from benefits.
//
The increase in the National Living Wage to £8.21 in 
April 2019 will benefit at least 2.1 million people.
Tax changes introduced by the UK government will 
make basic rate tax-payers over £1,200 better off in 
real terms from April 2019, compared with 2010.
//
In-work poverty.
UK-wide, the percentage of working age adults in 
working families in poverty has remained stable since 
2009/10 at around 15% on a relative AHC basis and 
around 9% on an absolute poverty before housing 
costs (BHC) basis. More people in work has resulted 
in a shift between the number of people in in-work 
poverty and the number of workless people in poverty. 
There were 4.8 million adults in working families in 
relative AHC poverty in 2017/18 compared to 4.1 
million in 2009/10, while for adults in workless families 
this figure had fallen to 3.2 million in 2017/18 from 3.8 
million in 2009/10.
//
In 2017/18, for couples with children, there was 
only a 7% risk of children being in relative poverty 
(after housing costs) if both parents worked full-time. 
However, this increased to a 66% risk of child poverty 
for couples with only part-time work.
//
Promoting full-time work and making sure it sufficiently 
pays is a key plank of the UK government’s anti-poverty 
strategy. In the UK, unemployment in the three months 
to March 2019 fell to 1.3 million and the number 
of people in work was at a near record high at 32.7 
million. There were over 1.5 million more people in 
work from Jan-March 2019 compared with Jan-March 
2015 and over 85% of the growth has been in fulltime work, which substantially reduces the risk of 
poverty. Average wages in the UK have grown faster 
than inflation in the 14 months to March 2019 (see 
Goal 8).
//
Housing costs. 
Poverty rates are higher when measured after, rather 
than before, housing costs. In 2017/18, 15% of 
individuals in the UK were in absolute poverty BHC and 
19% AHC. This reflects higher housing costs for private 
renting and trends in tenure with more working-age 
families renting privately than owning their home 
(see Goal 11).40 High housing and energy costs also 
contribute to fuel poverty (see Goal 7).
//
The Resilience Capabilities Programme aims to 
increase the UK’s capability to respond to and 
recover from civil emergencies, working with a wide 
range of stakeholders. The programme coordinates 
preparedness efforts to build the resilience of all in the 
UK, including those in vulnerable situations, and to 
reduce overall exposure and vulnerability.
//
The National Risk Register outlines key risks that have 
the potential to cause significant disruption to the UK, 
along with actions that people and businesses can take 
to protect themselves. Partnerships with business, civil 
society and other stakeholders have been established 
to develop new and innovative data approaches 
to measure domestic targets set out in the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and to create 
new estimates of disaster mortality which align with 
hazards listed in the National Risk Register (see Goal 
11).
//
Scotland’s National Performance Framework, 
underpinned by legislation, has a specific National 
Outcome that “we tackle poverty by sharing 
opportunities, wealth and power more equally.” 
Universal access to healthcare and free education with 
more progressive taxation are an important backdrop.
//
It is estimated that 24% of children in Scotland were 
living in relative poverty after housing costs in 2015-
18 and in-work poverty for working age adults has 
continually increased to 60% in 2015-18.
//
The complexity of tackling poverty is recognised. 
Scotland has a range of policies, plans and actions 
in place relating to this Goal, including targets in 
law (Child Poverty (Scotland) Act 2017) towards the 
eradication of child poverty, supported by a delivery 
plan and funding (Every Child, Every Chance).
//
Actions to create a fairer Scotland include:
• Establishing a Poverty and Inequality Commission to 
provide independent advice to Scottish Ministers on 
reducing poverty and inequality.
• Not-for-profit social lenders providing affordable 
lending and savings in the heart of communities 
to protect people from predatory lenders and 
unmanageable debt.
• Local authorities and the third sector working in 
partnership to establish shared premises hubs to 
make it easier for people to access advice and 
support services.
• A new Financial Health Check service accessed 
through Citizens Advice network in Scotland which 
helps parents maximise incomes, reduce household 
costs, and help avoid the ‘poverty premium’ of 
paying more for essential goods and services.
• Empowering Communities Fund, supporting 450 
community bodies and organisations since 2015 
to deliver community led-projects such as skills and 
learning to increase employment opportunities and 
increased access to affordable childcare.
• Poverty Truth Commission bringing people in poverty 
together with people in positions of power.
• Affordable Housing Supply Programme helping 
to revitalise some of the most deprived areas in 
Scotland with over £3 billion investment in the 
delivery of 50,000 affordable homes, 35,000 of 
which will be for social rent.
//
Scotland is in the midst of an unprecedented level 
of investment in early years of life, to support better 
outcomes for children and their families. Universal 
measures including the expansion of early learning and 
childcare to 1,140 hours for all three- and four-year-olds by August 2020, relevant to this and other Goals, 
will save a family around £4,500 per child a year. The 
Leave No One Behind agenda is supported by funded 
early learning and childcare for around a quarter of 
two-year-olds where parents are in receipt of specified 
benefits or are seeking asylum.
//
Scotland is taking forward a new social security system 
based on dignity, fairness and respect, being shaped 
by those with lived experience. Scotland has invested 
significantly in mitigating the impact of welfare reform 
on people’s lives (£125 million in 2018-19), however 
this remains a challenge.
//
A range of actions and policies, within Scotland’s 
devolved powers, are designed to boost household 
incomes at local and national level. This includes the 
Council Tax Reduction Scheme and, to support those in 
crisis, the Scottish Welfare Fund.
//
Sustainable and fair work is a long-term route out of 
poverty and 80.6% of employees in Scotland are paid 
the living wage with targets in place to lift at least a 
further 25,000 people to earning the living wage.
//
To tackle the inequalities that older people face, 
A Fairer Scotland for Older People: framework for 
action was published in April 2019. The framework is 
shaped by the voices of older people and focuses on 
older people in their communities; accessing services; 
and financial security. For example, the Scottish 
Government and Age UK worked together to raise 
awareness of the financial support available to older 
people. An estimated £292 million in Pension Credit 
and Housing Benefit goes unclaimed each year.
Increasing public awareness of these benefits would 
help lower poverty levels among older people.
//
Relative poverty in Wales has remained steady for over 
a decade and is highest amongst children. Relative 
income poverty is a measure of income inequality, 
not a direct measure of living standards. There are 
fewer people estimated to be in material deprivation 
than in relative income poverty.46 Wales has focussed 
relentlessly on the root causes of poverty - giving 
children the best possible start in life and helping 
people into sustainable jobs.
//
Child poverty.
Children are the population group most likely to be in 
relative income poverty, with the latest data showing 
that 29% were living in income poverty. This has 
fallen over the past few years. The Child Poverty 
Strategy underlines the importance of a preventative 
approach to tackling child poverty, focussing on the 
early years and employability.
//
Flying Start supports more than 36,000 children 
under the age of four and their families each year in 
some of Wales’s most disadvantaged communities. 
The Families First programme aims to bring about a 
change in prevention and early intervention services 
for children and families. The early years provision in 
Wales’s new curriculum builds strong key skills and 
embeds health awareness, well-being, and resilience
in children from the earliest stage. Wales is developing 
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) aware public 
services which can take a more preventative approach 
to tackling ACEs and mitigating their impact through 
improving the resilience of children and young people.
//
Older people.
There are over 100,000 pensioners living in poverty 
in Wales. Over the longer term there has been a large 
reduction in the rate of poverty for pensioners,
however in recent years this increased slightly. Wales 
is co-producing a strategy for an ageing society with 
the Older People’s Commissioner for Wales and older 
people which adopts a rights-based approach that 
promotes equality and social justice.
//
Disability.
The employment rate among disabled adults aged 
16-64 remains lower than among those who are not 
disabled.49 This gap has remained stable in recent years. 
The Communities for Work (CfW) programme has 
supported disabled people in finding training and work 
by helping them overcome barriers to employment. 
Action on Disability: The Right to Independent Living
will ensure improved access to help, advice and services 
for disabled people in Wales.
//
Employability.
Wales’s Employability Plan sets out how people can 
be supported to increase their skills and ensure a 
coherent pathway for them to enter and progress in 
employment. Wales’s employability programmes, Jobs 
Growth Wales, ReAct, CfW, CfW+ Parents, Childcare 
and Employment, and others have supported tens of 
thousands of people into work over the last decade.
Working Wales is the all-Wales employability advisory 
service which provides individualised advice and 
guidance to support people into Employment.
//
Wales’s childcare offer will provide eligible working 
parents with 30 hours of government-funded early 
education and childcare for three- and four-year-olds 
for up to 48 weeks a year.
//
Fuel poverty. 
The recently published headline estimates for fuel 
poverty in Wales suggest that 155,000 households in 
Wales are living in fuel poverty, 12% of all households 
in Wales. The installation of energy efficiency 
measures to more than 50,800 homes in Wales via 
the Warm Homes Programme has been a contributing 
factor to the significant reduction in the levels of fuel 
poverty since 2008. The new fuel poverty estimates 
will inform a new plan to tackle fuel poverty due to be 
published in 2020.
//
In-work poverty. 
Underemployment and in-work poverty is a challenge, 
with many in short-term insecure and low paid jobs. 
Over half of working-age people living in poverty in 
Wales live in working households. In March 2019, 
Wales’s independent Fair Work Commission reported 
on these issues and the results are being considered.
//
Welfare reform and fiscal policy>
Responsibility for the policy development of welfare 
reform is not devolved. Wales does not have the 
resources available to fully address the impact of 
these changes, however, it continues to mitigate, 
where possible by providing additional funding to 
support those most affected. For example, additional 
investment has been made in frontline advice services 
to ensure coordinated, cost effective provision and 
there has been additional funding for the Discretionary 
Assistance Fund (DAF) which provides crisis payments 
for people experiencing an emergency and one-off 
payments to help people to live independently. Other 
initiatives include the Council Tax Reduction Scheme 
(CTRS) for those on a low income and the free school 
meals programme.
//
The Wales Centre for Public Policy is exploring the case 
for the devolved administration of certain aspects of 
the benefits system and looking at where things might 
be done differently in Wales.
//
People in Wales benefit from services outside of direct 
welfare income that improve people’s lives (known 
as a “social wage”). These include the education 
maintenance allowance for those in further education; 
free transport for over 60’s; free prescriptions; and free 
school breakfasts.
//
Recent figures show that the percentage of the 
population in Northern Ireland living in absolute 
poverty (before housing costs) has reduced from 20% 
in 2014/15 to 15% in 2017/18.52 While this is welcome 
news more needs to be done in tackling poverty and 
disadvantage and in supporting those who need it 
most.
//
Northern Ireland is continuing to help economically 
inactive people to move towards the labour market and 
to find and retain good jobs. The percentage of the 
Northern Irish population in employment has risen to 
71.3%.
//
Business in the Community Northern Ireland delivers a 
Community Resilience Programme to guide businesses 
in strategically investing time, skills money and 
expertise to tackle social issues in those communities 
most in need.
//
The UK is the only G7 country to have enshrined 
in law a commitment to spend 0.7% of its Gross 
National Income on Official Development Assistance 
every year. The UK Aid Strategy (2015) commits to 
tackling extreme poverty and helping the world’s most 
vulnerable, striving to eliminate extreme poverty by 
2030 and supporting the world’s poorest people to 
ensure that every person has access to basic needs, 
including prioritising the rights of girls and women.
//
Economic growth is essential for overcoming 
global poverty and for allowing human potential to 
flourish. The UK has scaled up its work on economic 
development to deliver ambitious outcomes, more than 
doubling spending from 2012/13 to 2015/16 
(£1.8 billion).
//
The UK’s global investment in cash transfers and 
broader social protection is a key contributor to Goal 
1 and Leave No One Behind. Support to developing 
country governments helps them to increase the 
coverage, quality and sustainability of their social 
protection systems. The UK has increased its focus on 
girls and women and people with disabilities, on the 
poorest and most vulnerable in fragile states, and on 
building social protection systems that can respond to 
crises, to prevent development gains being reversed.
//
Secure property rights are a foundation of economic 
development and social justice. The UK supports many 
programmes that ensure men and women have equal 
rights to land and property. Since 2010, the UK has 
funded land registration programmes across Africa that 
have issued more than 11.4 million land documents 
and helped over 6.6 million women improve their rights 
to land.55 Through LEGEND, a global land governance 
programme, the UK has promoted responsible 
investment in land; innovative approaches to land 
registration, such as the Cadasta Platform used to map 
land rights using mobile phones; and improved data 
on land governance, including Prindex, a new global 
survey of people’s perceptions of land and property 
rights which will also be used in the UK by the ONS.
//
The UK is supporting the economic empowerment 
of women and girls as a critical step to end poverty 
sustainably. At the global level, the UN High Level 
Panel on women’s economic empowerment, with the 
UK’s leadership and influence, has pushed for further 
action by producing practical toolkits to address the 
main factors affecting women’s and girls’ economic 
empowerment. The UK is investing £7.4 million from 
2018 onwards in the Women Entrepreneurs Finance 
Initiative (WeFI), providing women entrepreneurs 
with critical financial services.
//
Poverty is complex, and income transfers alone do not 
break the cycle of long-term disadvantage. The UK is 
committed to tackling all forms of poverty, including 
childhood disadvantage and in-work poverty, at home 
and abroad.
//
The proportion of children in UK households with a 
combination of low income (below 70% of median 
income) and material deprivation, including access to 
essentials and inclusion in activities, has declined from 
13% in 2010/11 to 12% in 2017/18.57 The UK will 
continue to monitor poverty trends closely and develop 
further measurements, including using the new 
Social Metrics Commission’s measure of disposable 
income for analysis, in order to understand the causes, 
consequences and solutions to poverty. To further 
build evidence on multi-dimensional poverty, Scotland 
is investing in the new Scottish Poverty and Inequality 
Research Unit (SPIRU), based at Glasgow Caledonian 
University. SPIRU is a multi-disciplinary research group 
providing an independent, evidence-based commentary 
on poverty, inequality and social policy in Scotland.
//
There is more to do to tackle the drivers of long-term 
poverty. Since the 2008 financial crisis, the UK has 
faced a very challenging fiscal position. The benefit 
freeze will conclude at the end of 2019/20. By 2022, 
Universal Credit will provide an additional £2 billion 
annually compared to the system it replaced.58 For most 
low-income families more income from employment 
than benefits has become the norm. The poorest 20% 
of working-age households and households containing 
children in 2017/18 received over 50% of their total 
income from earnings, up from 43% in 2009/10.
But there is more to do to tackle in-work poverty. 
In the UK, employment will continue to be promoted 
as the best route out of poverty, with further increases 
planned to the living wage and personal tax allowance. 
A focus on in-work progression (to help tackle 
in-work poverty) and on the availability and 
affordability of housing (discussed in Goal 11), will 
also continue. These actions complement those 
outlined in Goal 4 to reduce inequalities in education 
outcomes, which is a key part of the longer-term 
anti-poverty strategy.
//
The development of an income supplement in Scotland 
is an important next step relating to this Goal. It is a 
significant commitment that will be guided by two 
principles: 
• The additional income is targeted on those families 
who need it, and that it is therefore helping to lift 
the maximum number of children out of poverty;
• There is a robust and viable delivery route to get the 
additional income to those families, and that the 
delivery costs are reasonable.
//
The UK is taking action to deliver food security and 
improved nutrition for all, and to promote sustainable 
agriculture and effective land management with a view 
to improving productivity and growth.
//
Food Security.
The UK has a high degree of national food security, 
built on access to a range of sources, strong 
domestic production and global imports. Several 
indicators monitor levels of overall food security on 
an ongoing basis.
//
The UK Food Security Assessment is a comprehensive 
analysis of all aspects of food security and was last 
published in full in 2010. A review is currently in 
progress, including: Global Food Security; Global 
Resource Sustainability; UK Availability and Access; UK 
Supply Chain Resilience; Household Food Security; and 
Consumer Safety and Confidence.
//
The challenges in household food insecurity are closely 
tied to those in Goal 1. The UK government is fully 
committed to supporting vulnerable people and the 
approach to tackling poverty in all its forms is set out 
in Goal 1.
//
Challenges also remain in measuring and addressing 
every aspect of household food security (discussed 
further at the end of the chapter). For instance, some 
food bank networks publish data on the number of 
parcels they supply, but not all do so, and current 
measures of household food security are not at UK 
level (discussed further at the end of this chapter).
//
The UK government is exploring how it can build on 
current good practice to make it as easy as possible 
for food banks to identify and refer back to the local 
Jobcentre anyone who may, for a variety of reasons, 
not be receiving the full formal support to which they 
are entitled. To shape future evidence-based policy in 
this area, a review is underway on the drivers of food 
bank use and will be published before the end of 2019.
//
Securing Good Nutrition .
Three Healthy Food Schemes are helping children in 
the UK receive good nutrition and are reducing health 
inequalities. 
• Healthy Start Food Vouchers encourage a healthy 
diet for pregnant women, families and young 
children from low-income households in England, 
Wales and, currently, Scotland. Recipients are also 
eligible for free Healthy Start vitamins.
• The School Fruit and Vegetables Scheme provides 
children aged four to six at state-funded primary 
schools in England with a portion of fresh fruit or 
vegetables each day. 
• The Nursery Milk Scheme provides a reimbursement 
to childcare providers for a daily portion of milk to 
children and babies.
//
From 2018-2020, up to £26 million from Soft Drinks 
Industry Levy revenues in England will be invested 
in a breakfast club programme. The programme will 
introduce or improve breakfast clubs in over 1,700 
English schools and will be targeted at the most 
disadvantaged areas to ensure every child gets the 
best start in life.
//
Diet and Healthy Weight.
England’s 2016 Childhood Obesity Plan (Chapter One)
and the UK-wide 2018 Soft Drinks Industry Levy led to 
significant changes in the food and drinks industry and 
its products. In England, a Sugar Reduction programme 
announced in 2017 included a cross-industry ambition 
to achieve a 20%reduction in sugar levels.61 By 2018, 
there had been early reductions in five out of eight 
food categories where progress was measured.62
Industry guidelines for calorie reduction are also being 
developed, in order to achieve a 20% reduction 
by 2024 in products that contribute significantly to 
children’s calorie intake.
//
In England, following part one of the Childhood 
Obesity Plan, in 2018 Chapter Two made a bold 
ambition to halve childhood obesity and significantly 
reduce the gap in obesity between children from 
the most and least deprived areas by 2030. Key 
measures include consulting on restricting promotions 
of unhealthy products by location and price, further 
advertising restrictions and mandating calorie labelling 
in restaurants (see Goal 3).
//
In the UK 72% of land is used for agriculture.
In 2018, the UK government published a 25 Year 
Environment Plan. Since the UK government is 
responsible for a number of policies and programmes 
which affect sectors across the UK and internationally, 
some aspects of the Plan will apply to the UK as a 
whole. In other areas environmental policy is devolved 
and responsibility rests with the Scottish Government, 
Welsh Government and the Northern Ireland Civil 
Service. The proposals in the 25 Year Environment 
Plan apply to England only. A key component of the 
Plan, and the subsequent Agriculture Bill, is a new 
environmental land management system that will 
deliver environmental benefits and provide flexibility 
for farmers by putting decision-making more firmly 
in their hands.
//
The UK supports agricultural innovation through 
measures such as the agriculture technologies 
(agri-tech) strategy, launched in 2013, which has 
improved the flow of ideas and solutions from 
laboratory to farm. It includes £160 million of 
investment, over five years, in a Catalyst fund and 
four world-class centres for Agricultural Innovation.
//
The UK’s Plan for Public Procurement: Food and 
Catering Services aims to simplify the public 
procurement process and open up the market to more 
small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and local 
producers. It provides tools, including the balanced 
scorecard, to help contracting parties to balance 
a range of criteria beneficial to the consumer, the 
environment, and to producers.
//
Increasing Productivity and Driving Growth.
The overarching objective of the UK’s Industrial Strategy 
is to improve living standards and economic growth. 
The agri-food sector is a significant employer across 
the UK. From farming through to retail and catering 
the sector employs 4 million workers, 14% of all UK 
employment.
//
The UK’s Food and Drink Sector Council is developing 
a new agenda for the industry, capable of boosting 
productivity, Gross Value Added and securing the 
UK’s position as a global leader in affordable, safe, 
sustainable and high-quality food and drink.
//
The UK has been working with the Food and Drink 
Federation (FDF) to develop a Food and Drink Sector 
Deal, an industry-led partnership to boost productivity, 
with proposals focusing on three priority areas: 
innovation, exports and skills. 
//
The Transforming Food Production Programme, which 
has £90 million of funding through the Industrial 
Strategy Challenge Fund, launched in 2019 and 
focuses on four major challenges to productivity. 
These are biotic stress management, to address 
damage from other living organisms; efficient use of 
resources for crop production and livestock; resilience 
to climate variation; and digital connectivity.
//
The UK is working with a broad range of stakeholders 
to maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, plants 
and animals. To deliver this ambition the UK funds 
three genebank collections and four crop Genetic 
Improvement Networks (GINs). The GINs were renewed 
in 2018 and unlock the potential of the genetic 
material stored in genebanks by identifying beneficial 
traits that support productivity, sustainability, resilience 
and quality. GINs work with growers, seed companies 
and breeders to ensure that improved genetics are 
incorporated in elite UK crop varieties.
//
A modern and successful Scotland, with abundant 
natural resources, does not tolerate anyone going 
hungry. The right to food is protected in human rights 
law. A whole systems approach is taken to tackle 
poor health outcomes, diet and food insecurity and the 
Good Food Nation approach links farms to plates.
//
Data on household food insecurity in Scotland was 
published for the first time in 2017. This showed 
that 8% of adults experienced food insecurity in 
the previous 12 months, defined as worrying about 
running out of food due to lack of money or other 
resources. Household food insecurity was more 
prevalent amongst adults living in the most deprived 
areas and with the lowest incomes.
//
Scotland’s Good Food Nation ambition is that by 2025 
people from every walk of life will take pride and 
pleasure in, and benefit from, the food they produce, 
buy, cook, serve and eat every day. National and local 
government, civil society and communities are all 
working to tackle food insecurity. For example, the 
Scottish Welfare Fund provides a safety net for people 
on low incomes and a holistic approach to prevent 
future crises.
//
Community Food initiatives help people across 
Scotland access fresh, healthy food and develop 
the skills needed to prepare nutritious meals for 
themselves and their families. Regional networks in 
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Lanarkshire and the North East of 
Scotland help to link national priorities to local needs. 
A partnership approach to provide dignified access 
to food and trial new approaches to food insecurity 
in school holidays, through the Fair Food Fund, is 
underway. From summer 2019, smart payment cards 
will replace Healthy Start Food Vouchers to reduce 
stigma and increase choice for families in accessing 
good value healthy foods.
//
The Scottish Grocers Federation (SGF) Healthy 
Living Programme is helping to increase the range, 
quality and affordability of fresh produce and other 
healthier products in over 2,200 local convenience 
stores across Scotland, particularly in low income 
areas. The Programme has also reached over 10,000 
young people, teachers and parents through their Big 
Breakfast and Healthy Living Days. These events link 
local retailers, schools and communities together by 
helping young people to learn about nutritious food.
//
A Healthier Future: Scotland’s Diet and Health Weight 
Delivery Plan published in 2018 set out the ambition 
to halve childhood obesity by 2030 and significantly 
reduce diet-related health inequalities. With a focus on 
prevention, the plan sets out a wide range of action 
to make it easier for people to eat well and have a 
healthy weight, including: more support for children, 
young people and their families to achieve a healthy 
weight; additional investment in weight management 
services for people with, or at risk of, type 2 diabetes; 
and proposals to tackle junk food promotions and the 
marketing of unhealthy food.
//
A range of plans and policies are in place to support 
sustainable agriculture, including the:
• Scottish Rural Development Programme, funding 
a mixture of farm and non-farm schemes to help 
achieve sustainable economic growth in rural areas;
• Knowledge Transfer and Innovation Fund 
implementing projects aimed at increasing farmers 
skills and knowledge; and 
• Agri-Environment Climate Scheme, offering 
land-managers a five-year funded agreement and 
currently supporting more than 2,500 farming 
businesses across Scotland.
//
Sustaining new entrants into agriculture is crucial 
to the vitality, resilience and competitiveness of the 
agricultural sector. Scotland has introduced a Farming 
Opportunities for New Entrants (FONE) group and, 
by end 2018, FONE helped provide over 70 new land 
opportunities across over 5,000 hectares.
//
Crofting contributes towards the social, economic 
and environmental sustainability of Scotland’s rural 
and remote rural areas. There are approximately 
20,500 crofts and over 33,000 people live in crofting 
households.68 Scotland provides support to the 
environmental sustainability of agricultural practices 
and improve the livelihood of crofters.
//
Scotland has an active Women in Agriculture Taskforce, 
which seeks to promote women’s role in the industry 
with funding of £250,000 for 2018-20.
//
Securing Good Nutrition. 
Welsh initiatives to help improve nutrition include:
• The School Milk Subsidy Scheme which aims to 
increase consumption of milk and milk products by 
primary and secondary school children. 
• Free School Breakfasts. All children at primary 
schools maintained by a local authority can have a 
free breakfast at school, if provision is available.
• Free school meals are available to eligible pupils who 
attend school full-time.
//
Food poverty is one of five key priorities in the revised 
Child Poverty Strategy. Research shows that in Wales, 
some people are reporting food poverty: the 
2016-17 National Survey for Wales reported that 1% of 
households had received food from a food bank in the 
last 12 months.
//
In Wales, the Keep Wales Tidy programme works with 
ten Eco-Schools in deprived areas to develop food 
growing. This work has lasting important food poverty 
benefits and will encourage children of all attainment 
levels to develop practical skills.
//
Diet and Healthy Weight. 
The Public Health (Wales) Act 2017 has made a 
national obesity strategy a statutory requirement in 
Wales. In January 2019 the consultation ‘Healthy 
Weight: Healthy Wales’ was launched, setting out 
national ambitions to prevent and reduce obesity 
across Wales. The proposals include bringing forward 
legislation for the first time to help tackle obesity - this 
includes addressing price promotions, calorie labelling 
on foods eaten out of the home, and banning the sale 
of energy drinks to children.
//
Agriculture is vital for Wales. Together, farm and 
common land accounts for 1.8 million hectares, 88% 
of the total (2.1 million hectares) land in Wales.
The agricultural land in Wales is dominated by grass.
//
Implementation of the Rural Development Plan 2014-20 
and previous programmes in Wales, has maintained 
a focus on promoting agricultural productivity and 
promoting sustainable agriculture. Projects such as the 
Sustainable Production Grant and the Farm Business 
Grant directly sought to increase production and 
efficiency levels while encouraging greater levels of 
environmental performance through energy efficiency 
and low carbon technology and equipment.
//
Farming Connect provides farm businesses with a 
range of services which aim to improve resilience 
and promote transformational change delivering a 
coordinated and integrated package of knowledge 
transfer, innovation and advisory services. It aims to 
improve resilience and promote transformational 
change in agriculture, forestry and rural communities, 
supporting a wide range of activities which improve 
competitiveness in the agriculture and forestry 
industries, safeguard and enhance the rural 
environment and foster competitive and sustainable 
rural businesses and thriving rural communities.
//
The Food Business Investment Scheme is designed 
to help primary producers of agricultural products 
in Wales to add value to their outputs by providing 
support to those businesses that do first and/or second 
stage processing activities.
//
Wales has been at the forefront of the development of 
agri-environment schemes, such as the Glastir scheme, 
which seek to identify and deliver real environmental 
improvements as part of a ‘whole farm’ approach to 
sustainable agriculture. Through the Glastir scheme, 
Welsh farmers are encouraged to maintain traditional 
landscape features and habitats to benefit Wales’s 
native biodiversity. This activity also contributes to 
the economic sustainability of farms and the wider 
rural community.
//
Northern Ireland is working to ensure those entering, 
and already in, the agricultural-food industry have 
the competency to take forward the sustainable 
development of the sector. Implementation of new 
action across key sectors of the Northern Irish economy 
will contribute to improved water quality and better 
nutrient management.
//
In Northern Ireland, the Farm Business Improvement 
Scheme (FBIS) Capital scheme, launched in October 
2016, is worth £40 million in its initial phase. 
The Scheme is part of a package of measures aimed 
at the sustainable growth of the agriculture and 
horticulture industries. The scheme will prioritise 
investments aimed at improving on-farm efficiency 
and environmental outcomes.
//
Official control programmes are implemented to 
ensure compliance with agricultural-food legislation 
in support of the competitiveness of the food and 
farming sectors. The Northern Ireland Regional 
Food Programme (NIRFP) also supports initiatives 
that raise the profile of quality regional food. 
The programme encourages collaboration within the 
local agricultural-food supply chain to develop and 
expand profitable and sustainable markets.
//
The UK is taking ambitious action to implement Goal 
2 internationally and to integrate it with wider action 
across the Goals. Agriculture is critical for food and 
nutrition security, poverty reduction, growth, climate 
action and sustainable natural resource management. 
The UK has adopted an Agriculture Policy and 
Economic Development Strategy that set out how it 
will deliver decent jobs and incomes, good nutrition, 
women’s agri-tech empowerment, and climate 
resilience. Achieving this supports the world’s poorest 
and most vulnerable people with their food security, 
sustainable jobs and livelihoods, and boosts agricultural 
trade and investment, while ensuring that better 
nourished, more productive workforces overseas also 
benefit the UK. Results so far are mostly to be seen in 
inclusive growth, nutrition, and research: UK global 
agriculture programmes help reduce chronic hunger.
//
The UK is also supporting the implementation of Goal 
2 directly, such as through the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Programme (GAFSP) which targets 
the poorest and most vulnerable. GAFSP has already 
supported over 9 million farmers, is expected to create 
1.1 million jobs for youth, and leverage more funding 
from the private sector.71 Its current focus is on fragile 
poor geographies who have increasing numbers of the 
global hungry.
//
Globally, 1 in 9 people (821 million) are chronically 
hungry. The UK’s Global Nutrition Strategy defines a 
high level of ambition to tackle this crisis. 
At the UK-hosted Nutrition for Growth Summit in 
2013, the UK pledged over £1.25 billion of additional 
funding for nutrition-specific programmes and for 
programmes which increase the nutrition impact of 
work in related sectors (for example in water and 
sanitation, health, agriculture or social protection). 
The UK also plans to reach 50 million people with 
nutrition interventions between 2015 and 2020, and 
is on track to meet these commitments. By 2018, 
the UK had reached 42 million children under five, 
adolescent girls, and women of childbearing age with 
relevant services. The UK is a global leader on tackling 
malnutrition, working both at country level and 
through the global Scaling Up Nutrition movement.
//
With support from the UK, the international agriculture 
research system CGIAR (the Consultative Group on 
International Agricultural Research) is supporting crop 
productivity to help 30 million people exit poverty 
by 2022. In 2017 the CGIAR reported results which 
included 9.6 million households with improved rice 
varieties in Africa and 10 million households reached to 
date with biofortified crops.
//
The UK’s support to AgResults, a £145 million 
multilateral initiative incentivising agri-tech investment 
in underserved markets, is delivering new evidence on 
how to develop and effectively scale new agriculture 
technologies. It has successfully stimulated market 
development for aflatoxin control agents in maize in 
Nigeria, leading to an annual net income increase for 
smallholders of US$318.
//
Since 2015 the UK has continued to positively engage 
with multilateral reform to address restrictions and 
distortions in global agricultural markets. The new 
UK World Trade Organization goods schedule reflects 
zero export subsidies for agriculture. The UK also 
participates actively in multilateral initiatives to address 
food price volatility, such as the G20 Agricultural 
Market Information System.
//
Significant work is already underway across the UK and 
there are a number of successes, but more needs to 
be done. This includes a renewed focus on Goal 2 and 
strong commitment to its delivery.
//
Whole-of-system food strategy.
A National Food Strategy will be published to create an 
overarching, integrated strategy for England. This will 
address issues across the food system and ensure food 
manufacturing, production, and consumption play 
their part in producing good environmental and health 
outcomes.
//
The Food Standards Agency’s 2018 Food and You 
Survey of England, Wales and Northern Ireland found 
that:
• 80% of respondents lived in households with high 
food security.
• 10% in households classified as marginally food 
secure.
• 10% reported living in household with low or very 
low food security.
//
These proportions are at similar levels to the 2016 
survey. However, figures are not at UK level. The Food 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) publishes household 
food security statistics at UK level, but due to the 
small sample size, these are presented as three-year 
averages. The FAO statistics show that the proportion 
of people experiencing severe food insecurity in the UK 
declined from 4% in 2014-16 to 3.4% in 2015-17.
//
The UK government is fully committed to supporting 
vulnerable people and tackling poverty in all its forms 
(see Goal 1). In order to improve the understanding 
of household food insecurity, the UK, has worked 
with food security experts to introduce a new set 
of food security questions into the Family Resources 
Survey from April 2019. These questions replicate 
the internationally recognised Adult Food Security 
Survey Module, first introduced by the United States 
Department of Agriculture, and will allow the UK to 
monitor the prevalence and severity of household 
food insecurity from spring 2021.
//
Small-scale agriculture.
Many of those who work in the UK agricultural sector 
work on small-scale farms. However, relatively little 
is known about the characteristics of such farms as a 
group. In Scotland, over half of farms are below 10 
hectares in size, and over 40,000 farms do not require 
the labour of one full-time worker. To create a vibrant 
tenanted sector, Scotland is undertaking research which 
aims to identify data gaps on small farms in existing 
datasets and literature; starting to explore small farmers 
as a social and economic group using qualitative 
research methods; and to provide recommendations 
and options for future research based on the project 
results. The challenges of European Union (EU) exit to 
sustainable farming and food production in Scotland 
are recognised. Scotland has proposed a period of 
stability and simplicity until 2024 to maintain certainty 
for farmers, crofters and land users.
//
Good nutrition.
Internationally, the Global Nutrition Summit in 2020 
will be a critical moment for the world to make new 
commitments capable of ensuring delivery of Goal 2.2 
by 2030. The UK attaches the highest importance to 
the Summit and is working closely with Japan, as host, 
to prepare ambitious Summit outcomes.
//
All UK nations maintain their commitment to a 
National Health Service (NHS) free for all at the point of 
use, providing high-quality care based on clinical need.
//
In England alone, NHS health checks have reached 
over six million people since 2013, making it one of 
the largest prevention programmes in the world, with 
people from the most disadvantaged communities 
benefitting the most.
//
The NHS England Long-Term Plan, published on 7 
January 2019, represents another step change in this 
ambition for preventative services, which, together with 
primary and community care are now at the centre of 
health and care service planning.
//
These advances are underpinned by the UK’s largest 
funder of health and care research, the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR). NIHR people, 
programmes, centres of excellence and systems 
together represent the most integrated health research 
system in the world.
//
In England, since 2010, stillbirths have fallen by 18.8%, 
neonatal mortality by 5.8% and maternal mortality 
by 8%.79 This achievement has been supported by an 
investment of nearly £40 million in England’s maternity 
services over this time. Since 2017 more than £9 million 
of additional funding is supporting activities such as 
safety training for multidisciplinary maternity teams. 
This supports the aim to reduce the rate of stillbirths, 
neonatal deaths, maternal deaths and brain injuries in 
babies soon after birth by 50% by 2025.
//
However, to make real inroads towards this Global 
Target demands a real focus on populations most at 
risk across all four nations of the UK. Women from the 
poorest backgrounds and mothers from Black, Asian 
and Minority Ethnic (BAME) groups are at higher risk 
of their baby dying in the womb or soon after birth.80
The number of deaths of children in England under 5 
years per 1,000 live births has slightly risen from 4.2 in 
2015 to 4.4 in 2016, following a steady decline from 
2005 to 2015.
//
In England, there is an established network of open 
access sexual health services, as part of the universal 
service offered by the NHS. There were 1.85 million 
contacts with dedicated sexual and reproductive 
health services in England in 2017/18. This represented 
a decrease of 9.1% on the number of contacts in 
2015/16 (2.03 million).
//
As part of preventive action against cancer, the Human 
Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine programme is being 
expanded to include 12 and 13-year-old boys (year 8) 
from academic year 2019/20.
//
Women in England can easily access abortions free of 
charge. The long-term trend in the rate of abortions 
has declined in England and Wales, compared to 2007, 
and in 2017 it was 16.7 per 1,000 resident women. 
However, this is a slight increase from the 2015 rate of 
16.0 per 1,000.
//
England’s commitment to end new transmissions of 
HIV by 2030 has so far seen a 28% reduction in new 
incidences in England since 2015, with 3,973 new 
incidences in 2017 compared to 5,485 in 2015.
//
After clean water, vaccination is the most effective 
public health intervention that protects children 
and adults against diseases and the World Health 
Organization (WHO) has included vaccine hesitancy as 
one of their ten threats to global health in 2019.
//
Uptake is high for most childhood vaccination 
programmes across the UK, including MenB (92.9%), 
MMR (91.7%) and rotavirus (90.6%), and work is 
underway to increase this.85 The flu vaccine is freely 
available to those aged six months to 65 years in 
clinical risk groups, pregnant woman and carers and to 
everyone aged 65 and over. As part of the extension of 
the national flu immunisation programme to children, 
all those from ages 2 to 9 were offered flu vaccination 
from autumn 2018, to provide protection and reduce 
onward transmission.
//
Preventing infection, through vaccination and good 
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) practice, is a 
key component of tackling one of the biggest threats 
facing the world’s population: antimicrobial resistance. 
There has been significant progress to reduce the 
inappropriate use of antimicrobials in recent years: 
in the UK total antibiotic use in humans has reduced 
by more than 7% from 2014-2017 and the sales of 
antibiotics for use in food-producing animals dropped 
40% in the same time period.
//
The UK-wide Clean Air Strategy sets out ambitious 
plans to address one of the biggest threats to public 
health in the UK. In 2017, 5.1% of adult deaths in 
England were attributed to particulate air pollution.87
The Strategy builds on a commitment to halve the 
number of people living in areas breaching WHO 
guidelines on particulate matter by 2025.
//
The safety of those travelling on UK roads is 
paramount. UK roads are among the world’s safest, 
and there remains a commitment to invest both in 
routine maintenance and in technologies or upgrades 
that maintain and improve the safety record of the UK’s 
road networks. For Great Britain, in 2017, there were 
1,793 reported road deaths, similar to the level seen 
since 2012, and 170,993 overall road traffic casualties, 
a decrease of 8% compared to 2015.
//
The risk of cardiovascular disease increases with age. 
In England and Wales, the mortality rate attributed 
to cardiovascular disease in 65 to 69 -year- olds was 
266 persons per 100,000 population in 2017, a slight 
decrease from the rate in 2015 (272 per 100,000). 
Action is being taken to address cardiovascular diseases 
and other non-communicable diseases such as diabetes 
and cancer.
//
At the forefront of this drive is the development of 
Genomics. This marks the age of precision medicine 
and has huge implications for the understanding and 
treatment of rare diseases, cancer and infections. The 
UK will maintain its commitment to the development 
of this cutting-edge technology with its potential to 
significantly improve the quality of human lives.
//
The Healthier You: NHS Diabetes Prevention 
Programme, run together with NHS England and 
Diabetes UK now covers 75% of England, one year 
ahead of schedule.
//
In England, childhood obesity is a real concern. In 
2015/16 22.1% of reception children were overweight 
or obese. In 2017/18 this increased to 22.4%. Action 
to address this is covered in Goal 2.
//
Smoking prevalence has continued to decline. 
England’s Tobacco Control Plan 2017-2022, aims to 
reduce prevalence of smoking, including to 12% or 
less in adults. From 2015-2017, smoking prevalence 
in adults reduced from 16.9% to 14.9%. The new 
Control Plan reinforces the regulatory framework, 
including by restricting advertising.
//
In England, over 1 million people are accessing 
Improving Access to Psychological Therapies services 
each year. A £15 million investment is being made 
to ensure at least 1 million people are trained in basic 
mental health first aid skills. The Time to Change 
initiative is reducing mental health illness stigma and 
utilising technology to develop digital tools to maintain 
good mental health. These will help predict future 
behaviour, such as risk of self-harm or suicide.
//
The Five Year Forward View for Mental Health sets a 
commitment to reduce suicides in England by 10% 
by 2020/21, compared to 2015. Between 2015 and 
2017, the number of suicides in England reduced by 
more than 7% from 4,820 to 4,451,94 showing good 
progress towards achieving the target. All areas in 
England now have a multi-agency suicide prevention 
plan in place. This is supported by a £25 million 
investment. The National Suicide Prevention Strategy 
highlights men as a high-risk group and a proportion of 
the £25 million funding will test different approaches 
to reaching men in local communities.
//
Maternal mental health is also a priority, with maternal 
suicide the leading cause of direct deaths occurring 
within a year of pregnancy from 2014-16.95 £365 
million will be invested in perinatal mental health 
services from 2015 to 2020. Progress in 2017/2018 
has exceeded expectations more than three-fold, with 
7,000 more women accessing services by March 2018 
against a target of 2,000.
//
Increased well-being is at the heart of Scotland’s 
National Performance Framework. It is a necessity to 
close the gap between the health of the wealthiest and 
poorest communities to deliver an overall improvement 
in population health. While many of the targets are 
met in Scotland, there is a long-term strategic approach 
underpinning the challenges, focussing on excellent 
healthcare services and preventative population health 
approaches.
//
Public health challenges in Scotland include smoking, 
alcohol, drugs and diet (link to Goal 2), and action is 
being taken to tackle these.
//
Building on previous work and policy initiatives such 
as minimum unit pricing for alcohol, the Alcohol 
Framework 2018: Preventing Harm has a key focus on 
reducing health inequalities.
//
A five-year plan was published in June 2018 with 
an ambition to create a tobacco-free generation by 
reducing smoking rates to 5% or less by 2034.
//
Scotland is also committed to preventing and reducing 
the impact of Adverse Child Experiences (ACEs) and 
supporting resilience to overcome adversity.
//
An expert group will examine the key drivers of drugs-related deaths and advise on what further measures 
could help save lives and reduce harm.
//
It is widely recognised that short inter-pregnancy 
intervals of less than 12 months are associated with an 
increased risk of obstetric and neonatal complications 
including preterm birth, stillbirth and neonatal death. 
The provision of post-partum contraception (PPC) 
has therefore been a policy priority for the Scottish 
Government for some time. It is set out in the 
Refreshed Maternity Framework (2011), the Sexual 
Health and Blood Borne Virus Framework Update 
(2015) and the Pregnancy and Parenthood in Young 
People Strategy (2016).
//
The provision of long acting reversible contraception 
(LARC) methods as part of PPC is particularly key, 
as these provide a high level of efficacy and are 
independent of adherence for their effectiveness. 
However, it is essential that women are always offered 
LARC as a choice within a range of methods (if any 
is desired) so that they remain in control of their own 
reproductive health.
//
There has been a steady and significant increase in the 
proportion of adults who have two or more symptoms 
of depression (8% in 2010/11 to 11% in 2016/17).97
Since 2002, the rate of suicide has generally been 
on a downward trend to 12.8 deaths per 100,000 
population in 2017. The 2017 male suicide rate of 19.9 
per 100,000 was over three times that for females (5.7 
per 100,000). There is a strong relationship between 
deprivation and suicide, with the rates of suicide in the 
most deprived 10% of Scotland more than two and 
half times greater than the least deprived 10% (21.9 
per 100,000 compared to 7.6 per 100,000) in the 
2013-17 period.
//
Scotland’s Mental Health Strategy 2017-2027 sets out 
actions to tackle poor mental health for people to get 
the right help at the right time, expect recovery and 
fully enjoy their rights free from stigma. The delivery 
of a package of support in schools, colleges and 
communities is underway that will see new school 
nurses and counsellors and bespoke support for new 
and expectant mothers.
//
A Suicide Prevention Action Plan: Every Life Matters
sets out further measures to continue the decline in 
suicides, with a target to reduce the rate by 20% by 
2022 (from 2017 baseline).
//
In Wales, the ability to live healthy lives is central to 
overall well-being for Welsh people. It filters through 
all other inter-connected aspects of people’s lives, 
including the ways in which people grow, learn, work, 
interact and age.
//
The complex and interrelated causes of health 
inequalities need a combination of approaches to 
tackle them. Action on inequalities is a key feature of 
a broad range of policies and programmes, including 
upstream actions to help people cope, targeting actions 
to address unhealthy behaviours, and improving access 
to healthcare.
//
Good health and well-being depend on more than 
provision of good health services. This principle is 
driven forward through Wales’s long-term plan for 
health and social care, ‘A Healthier Wales’, a long-term 
future vision of a whole-system approach to health 
and social care, including greater emphasis on health 
promotion and preventative approaches.
//
Most adults report good overall health, with 70% 
saying they were in ‘good’ or ‘very good’ health in the 
National Survey for Wales 2017-18.
//
Teenage conceptions reached a record low in Wales in 
2016 and have fallen dramatically since 2008. The rate 
for those aged under 18 has more than halved over the 
last decade100 to 24.3 in 2015 and 20.2 women under 
18 in 2017.
//
Smoking rates and the percentage of people 
consuming excess alcohol in Wales have both reduced 
over time. Smoking-attributable mortality has also 
decreased. However, tobacco is the leading single 
cause of premature death in Wales and a major 
contributor to health inequalities, at around one in 
every six of all deaths in people aged 35 and over. In 
order to help smokers give up, all smoking cessation 
services are accessed via a single contact point, ‘Help 
Me Quit’.
//
In 2017, a reduction in the number of adults drinking 
over the weekly guidelines was reported, at 18%, 
down from 20% in 2016.104 There were 185 deaths 
from drug misuse in 2017, a decrease of 4% from 
2016. Prevention is at the heart of the Welsh 
substance misuse strategy ‘Working Together to 
Reduce Harm’. The services on offer are aimed at all 
individuals and families, particularly those who are 
most disadvantaged.
//
One of the key achievements for Wales is the passing 
of the Public Health (Minimum Price for Alcohol) 
(Wales) Act 2018. Minimum pricing is a targeted 
measure, which aims to reduce hazardous and harmful 
levels of drinking.
//
Results from the first Welsh Adverse Childhood 
Experiences (ACEs) study show that suffering four or 
more harmful experiences in childhood increases the 
chances of high-risk drinking in adulthood by four 
times, being a smoker by six times and being involved 
in violence in the last year by around 14 times.
The Welsh Government has therefore prioritised the 
tackling of ACEs and has supported Cymru Well Wales 
in establishing an ACE Support Hub to tackle the 
negative impacts of Adverse Childhood Experiences.
//
Obesity is a leading public health concern in Wales. 
Almost a quarter of adults and 12.4% of children 
are obese. The causes of obesity are complex 
and personal. ‘Healthy Weight: Healthy Wales’ will 
set out Wales’s ambitions to prevent and reduce 
obesity in Wales, with a focus on leadership, creating 
healthy environments and settings, and providing the 
opportunities and inspiring people to achieve and 
maintain a healthy body weight.
//
In 2016-17, there were 8,723 admissions to mental 
health facilities in Wales, a decrease of 6% from 
2015-16. ‘Together for Mental Health’ strategy aims 
to improve the mental health of everyone in Wales 
and the lives of people using mental health services, 
and their carers and their families, through a range 
of support, from helping people to feel better and 
manage their own mental health to services for people 
with severe, long-lasting mental illness.
//
A 2017 report published by Public Health Wales 
estimated the equivalent of 1,604 deaths of people 
aged 30+years was attributable to PM2.5 and an 
estimated equivalent of 1,108 deaths to NO2 
(nitrogen dioxide) each year. Wales has taken a proactive 
approach to tackling air quality and the main air 
pollutants hazardous to health have been steadily 
declining since the 1990s.
//
Wales provides strategic direction and funding to 
partners to deliver education and engineering road 
safety interventions across Wales through the Road 
Safety Capital & Revenue Grants, and funding to Trunk 
Road Agents. There has been good progress made 
against Wales’s targets for casualty reduction in the 
whole population and amongst young people, with a 
25% reduction for all people killed or seriously injured 
in road traffic accidents and a 41% reduction in young 
people compared with the 2004-2008 average.
//
Northern Ireland has put in place a wide range of 
programmes, information and support mechanisms to 
underpin delivery of health and well-being outcomes. 
In addition, Northern Ireland is working together 
with communities to create the conditions to support 
improved health and encourage healthier choices.
//
In Northern Ireland, resources continue to be devoted 
to ensuring that initiatives and actions taken result in 
meaningful improvements for people in terms of their 
health and well-being, life expectancy and quality of 
their healthcare experience. An example is in relation 
to smoking cessation, obesity prevention, alcohol and 
drugs misuse and early treatment of stroke patients.
//
Progress towards the overall Goal of ‘Good Health and 
Well-being’ reflects the fact that many of the influences 
on health and well-being are inter-dependent and 
require significant focus over an extended period of 
time. This is to deliver clear, positive and measurable 
change. Just as changes in Healthy Life Expectancy 
at birth are expected to be gradual, reducing the 
Healthy Life Expectancy gap between the most and 
least deprived is a significant challenge which requires 
sustained collaboration both at regional and local 
levels.
//
Nursing Now Northern Ireland was launched in January 
2019. It aims to improve health by raising the profile 
and status of nursing worldwide. This is to ensure 
Northern Ireland-based nurses are well-placed to tackle 
the health challenges of the 21st century.
//
In Northern Ireland, while it is encouraging to 
see positive change in preventable mortality and 
confidence of older populations (measured using selfefficacy), progress is slower on lowering the proportion 
of the population with possible mental health problems 
and on healthy life expectancy, including narrowing the 
deprivation gap.
//
For individuals, families and communities to take 
greater control over their lives and be enabled and 
supported in leading healthy, active lives, collaboration 
is needed across government and with local authorities, 
the community and voluntary sector, private businesses 
and other organisations and delivery partners to 
address the factors which impact on health and wellbeing. In Northern Ireland the focus is to improve 
healthy life expectancy and reduce preventable deaths; 
to reduce health inequalities; to improve the quality 
of the healthcare experience; and to improve mental 
health.
//
Work remains to build on successes and to address 
those indicators where no change is identified 
at present, or where measurement data is being 
developed.
//
The UK is the second largest global health donor and 
is committed to supporting progress globally towards 
Goal 3.113 This includes tackling diseases, such as HIV/
AIDS, Tuberculosis (TB), malaria and the Neglected 
Tropical Diseases; ensuring global health security 
through supporting countries to prevent, identify and 
manage disease outbreaks and to minimise the risk of 
AMR; and strengthening health systems to ensure that 
everyone, even the most disadvantaged, has access to 
quality essential health services, without risk of financial 
hardship.
//
To tackle specific diseases, the UK is investing up to 
£1.2 billion (2016-2019) in the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, TB and Malaria. The Fund ensured 17.5 million 
people received antiretroviral therapy for HIV and 197 
million mosquito nets were distributed for malaria in 
2017.114 The UK also delivered 144 million treatments 
to prevent and treat neglected tropical diseases in 
2017115 and is the largest funder of Gavi,116 the 
Vaccine Alliance, which is on track to vaccinate 300 
million children globally between 2016 and 2020. So 
far, in 2016 and 2017, 127 million children have been 
vaccinated.
//
The UK has been at the forefront of responding to 
global health threats. Since responding to the West 
Africa Ebola outbreak, the UK has supported regional 
preparedness in over 20 countries through the WHO 
Africa regional office. The UK Public Health Rapid 
Support Team responds to disease outbreaks, conducts 
research and builds capacity. The UK, through its 
Tackling Deadly Diseases in Africa Programme (£95 
million), is supporting the WHO and international 
development company DAI to enhance country 
capabilities to prevent, detect and respond to deadly 
diseases in 47 countries, including in the Sahel.
//
The UK hosted the first Global Ministerial Mental 
Health Summit in 2018 and its Framework Convention 
on Tobacco Control (FCTC) 2030 project supports 
tobacco control in 15 countries. The UK works closely 
with the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs 
and Drug Addiction and hosts the World Health 
Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre for public 
health management of Chemical Exposures.
//
Road crashes are the biggest killer of 5 to 29-year-olds 
globally. The UK has funded the Global Road Safety 
Facility since 2013, contributing £4 million between 
2015-2017 and, in 2018, committing £10.6 million 
more by 2022. Through this work, 2,159 road deaths 
and injuries were avoided in 2017.119 Funding also 
contributed to the development of the Latin American 
Road Safety Observatory and the inception of an 
African Road Safety Observatory.
//
The UK invests over £1 billion in research, which 
underpins Goal 3, including product development 
for vaccines, medicines and other tools to tackle 
diseases, and applied health research to improve health 
outcomes in the poorest countries.
//
One example of UK-funded research specific to AMR is 
the £50 million Global AMR Innovation Fund (GAMRIF) 
that supports early-stage innovative research in 
underfunded areas of AMR research and development 
for the benefit of people in low- and middleincome countries. GAMRIF works with researchers, 
governments and industry to fund research into 
potential future innovations to tackle AMR throughout 
the world. This includes innovation in vaccines, 
alternatives to traditional antibiotics, and diagnostics.
//
The Fleming Fund is a £265 million UK aid investment 
supporting the generation and use of AMR data in lowand middle-income countries. It builds partnerships and 
leverages UK and international expertise to improve 
laboratory capacity and surveillance, helping countries 
to tackle this critical issue.
//
On maternal and child health, the UK invested 
approximately £1 billion a year across bilateral 
programmes and multilateral organisations from 
2014-17. In 2017, the UK invested in the Global 
Financing Facility to increase financing of evidencebased maternal and child health interventions in 27 
countries.
//
The UK is a global leader on sexual and reproductive 
health, co-hosted the 2017 Family Planning Summit, 
and is investing an average of £225 million per 
year in voluntary family planning from 2017-2022. 
Between April 2017 and March 2018, 14 million 
women and girls were reached with voluntary modern 
contraception, preventing 4.4 million unintended 
pregnancies, 1.2 million unsafe abortions and saving 
4,900 women’s lives.
//
The UK’s health systems strengthening work ranges 
from working directly with partner governments to 
strengthen elements of their health services, such as 
the provision of good nutrition, water and sanitation 
and funding the WHO across their work and in their 
drive to achieve Universal Health Coverage.
//
Obesity is a leading public health concern in the UK. 
The burden of childhood obesity is greatest in the 
most deprived areas, with children growing up in 
low-income households more than twice as likely to 
be obese than those in higher-income households. 
Children from black and minority ethnic families are 
also more likely than children from white families to 
be overweight or obese and this inequality gap is 
increasing.
//
The causes of obesity are complex. All sectors have a 
part to play in making food and drink healthier and 
supporting healthier choices for children. England’s 
Childhood Obesity Plan sets an ambition to halve 
childhood obesity and significantly reduce the gap 
in obesity between children from the most and least 
deprived areas by 2030. Wales’s Healthy Weight: 
Healthy Wales also sets out an ambition to prevent and 
reduce obesity, with a focus on leadership, creating 
healthy environments and settings, and providing the 
opportunities and inspiring people to achieve and 
maintain a healthy body weight.
//
Evaluating mental health.
Recent increases in funding and action to tackle 
poor mental health across the UK will require good 
evaluation to understand which interventions have 
the biggest impact. One commitment in Scotland’s 
Mental Health Strategy is to develop a mental health 
strategy data framework, recognising that good mental 
health is not the sole preserve of health services, or 
even public services. The framework comprises two 
elements: a mental health quality indicator profile 
to illustrate the quality of services; and a mental 
health population framework to provide an accessible 
overview for those seeking to understand Scotland’s 
mental health and well-being at the population level. A 
full progress review of the Mental Health Strategy will 
be held in 2022 to ensure that lessons are learnt from 
actions to that point.
//
Addressing global health security.
AMR threatens the achievement of many of the Goals. 
The UK has played a leading role in raising the profile 
of this issue globally and strengthening the level of 
international co-ordination. A review commissioned 
by the UK and prepared by former World Bank 
Chief Economist Lord O’Neill had global impact in 
highlighting the risks of AMR, both to lives and to the 
economy. It reported that drug-resistant infections are 
estimated to contribute to over two thousand deaths in 
the UK each year and are predicted to cause 10 million 
deaths per year globally by 2050 (O’Neill Review). A 
significant contributor to AMR-related deaths is multidrug or rifampicin-resistant TB, which in 2016 caused 
an estimated 240,000 deaths.
//
With the publication of a 20-year vision for AMR in 
2019, the UK has committed to take a long-term 
view as to how to sustain action and contribute to the 
global effort to contain and control resistance, working 
with partners across all sectors. The UK must continue 
to display strong leadership and work to ensure AMR 
is at the top of global agendas, whilst supporting other 
countries in their efforts to combat this threat.
//
All school-age children have access to a free education, 
provided in a variety of settings, with 85% of schools 
in England rated ‘Good’ or ‘Outstanding’ by Ofsted as 
at December 2018, compared to 82% in August 2015 
and 68% in August 2010.124 In November 2017, over 
95% of full-time equivalent teachers in all state-funded 
schools in England had Qualified Teacher Status.
//
England achieved its highest ever score in reading in 
2016,126 moving from joint 10th in the previous survey 
in 2011127 to joint 8th in the most recent Progress in 
International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) rankings. 
Pupils in England also performed, on average, 
significantly above the international mean in maths 
and science in the most recent Trends in International 
Maths and Science Study (TIMSS) 2015.
//
Early years education and childcare play an important 
role in tackling social disadvantage and narrowing gaps 
in later attainment. A 2018 analysis by the Education 
Policy Institute showed that, on average, disadvantaged 
children are four months behind at age 5. That grows 
by an additional five months by age 11, and a further 
nine months by age 16. Universal early education 
is addressing this by giving children in England 15 
hours a week of free early years education for 38 
weeks after their third birthday, or second birthday for 
disadvantaged children. Since 2017, working families 
with three to four-year-olds have been eligible for an 
additional 15 hours a week of free childcare on top of 
the universal entitlement. These policies are delivering 
near universal participation in organised education one 
year before the official primary school entry age.
//
The UK government provides equal access to affordable 
and quality technical, vocational and tertiary education, 
including to its world-class universities. As of OctoberDecember 2018, an estimated 11.3% of 16 to 24-yearolds were not in education, employment or training 
in England, a slight though not statistically significant 
decrease, from 11.6% in the same period of 2015.
//
From August 2019, Higher Education providers will be 
required to publish disaggregated student application 
and performance data to highlight which institutions 
need to widen access and improve outcomes for all 
their students.
//
Apprenticeships are a key pillar of a skilled workforce. 
Since May 2015, over 1.7 million apprenticeships have 
been taken up in England.132 An apprenticeship reform 
programme has seen employers with an annual pay bill 
of £3 million or more levied 0.5% of that bill to fund 
quality apprenticeship training and deepen employer 
engagement in this valuable area.
//
In England, employer-designed T Level programmes 
will be a new gold standard in technical excellence and 
a high-quality alternative to academic education. An 
additional £500 million per year will be invested in T 
Levels, once they are fully rolled out in 2020.
//
Lifelong learning is essential to future-proof the 
economy. Since 2015, advanced learner loans (ALLs) 
have helped adult learners in England undertake 
qualifications. In the academic year 2017/18, 98,900 
learners benefitted from ALL payments, worth £217 
million. A £100 million adult National Retraining 
Scheme will start in 2019, designed to give every 
worker the opportunity to upskill or retrain.
//
The Adult Education Budget (AEB) supports adults in 
England who have not achieved secondary school-level English and Maths qualifications. It helps them 
to overcome barriers to education or training; such 
as childcare and transport costs; or any reasonable 
adjustments for those with a learning difficulty or 
disability.
//
The Children and Families Act 2014 sets out a 
presumption of mainstream education for pupils in 
England with special educational needs and disability. 
This enables children and young people, no matter 
their needs, to develop the social skills they will need 
to lead happy and fulfilled lives and succeed in future 
education and employment.
//
Civil society organisations are delivering programmes to 
tackle homophobic, biphobic, and transphobic bullying 
in schools throughout England and, between 2016-19, 
completed interventions in 1,200 schools.
//
Several programmes in England aim to increase girls’ 
engagement in science, technology, engineering and 
maths (STEM) subjects. In 2018, 27.1% of A-Level 
entries by girls were in STEM subjects, an increase 
of 3.3 percentage points since 2015. STEM 
ambassadors are raising awareness of the range of 
careers that STEM qualifications offer.
//
In England, the national curriculum provides teachers 
with the opportunity to teach pupils about Global 
Goal topics which teachers are free to expand on if 
they choose. For example, the Citizenship curriculum 
teaches pupils about the rule of law, justice system and 
how laws are shaped and enforced. Citizenship also 
teaches about the diverse national, regional, religious 
and ethnic identities in the UK and the need for mutual 
respect and understanding. The British Council is 
helping to create a school resource, focussed on Goal 
4.7, designed to teach students across the UK about 
the Goals.
//
In England, the Keeping Children Safe in Education
guidance requires all schools to create safe and 
accessible learning environments. Schools are 
contractually obliged to ensure building designs do not 
disadvantage pupils with disabilities, in terms of access 
to teaching, learning and social spaces.
//
To tackle the impact that the costs of period products 
can have on education, it was announced in April 
2019 that all primary and secondary school pupils and 
college students in England will have access to free 
period products in their place of study.
//
Scotland is focussed on closing the poverty-related 
attainment gap and has a strong Leave No One Behind 
approach to this Goal.
//
Scotland has near universal uptake of funded places 
of early learning and childcare (99% in 2017)136 and 
Goal 1 sets out Scotland’s commitment to doubling the 
provision to 1,140 hours per year by August 2020.
//
The Children and Young People Improvement 
Collaborative has been set up to make early years, 
health, family services and schools more effective 
and responsive in tackling inequality and improving 
children’s outcomes.
//
Through the Curriculum for Excellence, children and 
young people in Scotland are supported to become 
successful learners, confident individuals, responsible 
citizens and effective contributors to society.
//
An attainment gap still exists between children from 
Scotland’s most and least deprived areas although 
this is narrowing. For example, in 2009-10, the gap 
between the proportion of school leavers from the 
most and least deprived areas with one pass or more 
at Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework level 
4 or better was 11.3 percentage points. By 2017-
18 this had narrowed to 6.1 percentage points.137
Similarly, at SCQF level 5 or better the gap narrowed 
from 33.3 percentage points to 20.3 percentage points 
whilst at SCQF level 6 or better it narrowed from 45.6 
percentage points to 37.4 percentage points.
//
There is also a gap in attainment between boys 
and girls: in 2017-18 69% of female school leavers 
achieved SCQF level 6 or better, compared to 56% of 
male school leavers.
//
The National Improvement Framework was introduced 
in January 2016 and brings together a comprehensive 
range of performance data and information to 
support targeted improvement activity across Scottish 
education.
//
Children in schools across Scotland are entitled 
to study Learning for Sustainability as part of the 
Curriculum. This aims to provide pupils with the skills, 
knowledge and values to live socially, economically and 
environmentally sustainable lives in a global society. 
The Scottish Government will publish an action plan 
to further promote Learning for Sustainability in June 
2019. 
//
‘Respect for All: The National Approach to Anti-bullying 
for Scotland’s Children and Young People’ was updated 
in November 2017. This guidance is for everyone 
working with children and young people and provides 
a holistic approach to anti-bullying.
//
Guidance is in place to bridge the gap between 
legislation, policy and day-to-day experience, ensuring 
that children and young people have equitable access 
to a quality education which meets their needs and 
helps them achieve their full potential.
//
To ensure every child, irrespective of background, has 
an equal chance of entering and succeeding in higher 
education A Blueprint for Fairness: Final Report of 
the Commission on Widening Access (2016) made 
34 recommendations covering the whole education 
system which were accepted in full. This led to 
publication of Implementing ‘A Blueprint for Fairness’: 
Progress Report in 2017. Scotland’s aim is that by 
2030, 20% of students entering university will be from 
Scotland’s 20% most deprived backgrounds.
//
Scotland is committed to inclusive ongoing education, 
training and skills development for young people and 
adults beyond school. This is supported through: 
• Free university tuition for Scottish and European 
Union (EU) students.
• Financial support to students, particularly those who 
need it most.
• Tackling gender-based violence in colleges and 
universities through support for students.
• Working with partners to reduce youth 
unemployment and develop the young workforce.
• An all age career service through Skills Development 
Scotland.
• Piloting a work experience scheme for young 
disabled people to help remove barriers to finding 
jobs.
//
Wales is delivering positive educational results for 
children and young people to the end of compulsory 
schooling, at 16 years old. Results have been 
improving, with the percentage of pupils achieving five 
secondary school grades A*-C including maths and 
English / Welsh rising from just over 4 out of 10 pupils 
in 2007 to 6 out of 10 pupils in 2016.
//
In 2018, for the Foundation Phase and Key Stages 
2 to 4 girls’ achievement was higher than boys. 
(Statistical Release January 2019). This figure is 
reflected at the tertiary level with 17% more women 
than men receiving undergraduate qualifications in 
Wales in 2017/18,141 and were more likely to be in 
apprenticeship programmes.
//
‘Education in Wales: Our national mission’ pulls 
together the educational reforms needed to secure the 
effective implementation of Wales’s new curriculum. It 
calls upon international best practice and the education 
performance expertise of the global Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
//
The ‘four purposes’ for the new curriculum link directly 
to the Goals. They seek: 
• Ambitious, capable learners ready to learn 
throughout their lives. 
• Enterprising, creative contributors ready to play a full 
part in life and work. 
• Healthy, confident individuals ready to lead fulfilling 
lives as valued members of society. 
• Ethical, informed citizens ready to be citizens of 
Wales and the world. 
//
The education system is increasing the number of 
individuals able to speak Welsh to one million by 2050. 
Bilingualism gives more opportunities for people, 
helping to reduce inequalities of opportunity. In 
2017/18, 22% of six to seven-year-olds were assessed 
in Welsh first language, which will ensure that they 
become bilingual. Cymraeg 2050: One Million 
Welsh Speakers will increase this to 40% by 2050. 
The work of Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol and the 
National Centre for Learning Welsh, will increase the 
availability of post-compulsory education provision in 
Welsh and ensure that everyone in Wales can develop 
the language. To facilitate this growth, £51 million of 
funding will go towards Welsh-medium education.
//
All 3 and 4-year-olds in Wales are entitled to 
early education via the Foundation Phase nursery 
programme. The Foundation Phase is built on learning 
through play, as evidence shows that this is a powerful 
tool which can help children to develop and extend 
their language and communication skills. Around 6 
in 10 pupils aged 4 are at a stage of development 
in maths, language, literacy and communication in 
English that would be consistent with, or greater than, 
their age according to the framework. Around 9 in 10 
pupils are within one stage of development consistent 
with their age.
//
New legislation for additional learning needs (ALN) has 
been adopted in Wales for children and young people 
aged 0-25 as part of a wider ALN transformation 
programme.
//
Under the new system, planning will be flexible and 
responsive, skilled professionals will be confident in 
identifying needs and deploying strategies to help 
learners overcome their barriers to learning, and the 
focus will be on the learner. These reforms have been 
designed collaboratively with stakeholders having a key 
role in their development.
//
From September 2018, eligible first-time 
undergraduates will get support to help fund their 
day-to-day living costs during term time, regardless of 
where in the UK they study.
//
A fnance package for Postgraduate Master’s study has 
been introduced, similar to that which is available for 
undergraduate study. Improved support will encourage 
more people to qualify at this level, developing their 
skills and careers.
//
Education for Sustainable Development and 
Global Citizenship (ESDGC) is delivered throughout 
compulsory education in Wales. A 2014 review
discovered that pupils’ understanding of the key 
concepts of sustainable development and global 
citizenship develops appropriately as they progress 
through school and is secure for each of the seven 
themes for ESDGC.
//
Wales’s new curriculum takes a transformational 
approach that embeds ESDGC throughout the 
curriculum through an international dimension, aiming 
to develop pupils to be ethical, informed citizens.
//
Wales’s International Education Programme provides 
individuals with the knowledge and skills necessary to 
contribute in a global community, with elements of the 
project relevant to ESDGC, ESDGC teacher training and 
Wales-Lesotho teacher placements.
//
In Northern Ireland several programmes and initiatives 
are being delivered to ensure children have access to 
quality child development and learning services.
//
One year of funded pre-school education is being 
provided for every child in their immediate pre-school 
year whose parents want it. In 2018/19, over 23,000 
children were offered a funded pre-school place and 
in the last six years, at least 99.8% of children whose 
parents stayed with the admissions process received the 
offer of a funded pre-school place.
//
The ‘Getting Ready to Learn’ programme aims to 
empower pre-school settings to help parents engage 
effectively and increase awareness of and involvement 
in their child’s development.
//
In 2018/19, 77% of settings are participating in the 
programme.146 In 2017/18, 13,300 families engaged 
with the programme which delivered improved home 
learning environments and outcomes for children such 
as parents reading, playing with them, reduced screen-time and increased physical activity.
//
The 3+ Review is a collaboration between education, 
health practitioners and parents which takes place 
in the pre-school setting. It aims to review the child’s 
development and identify any intervention required.
//
In 2017/18, around 85% of pre-school practitioners felt 
parents and children benefitted from the 3+ Review. 
An Executive Ten-Year Childcare Strategy is being 
developed (subject to Northern Ireland Executive 
approval).
//
A 2018 parental engagement campaign “Give your 
child a helping hand” is emphasising the importance of 
parents supporting their child’s learning.
//
The Extended Schools Programme delivered 3,455 
additional services and activities before, during 
and after the normal school day, including literacy 
and numeracy support, parental and community 
engagement, promoting healthy lifestyles and breakfast 
clubs.
//
In Northern Ireland, between 2015 and 2017, the 
percentage of people in employment qualified to level 
4, 3 and 2 education had increased by 2.8, 3.0 and 
1.5 percentage points respectively. However, this has 
slightly reduced for level 1 - 0.1 percentage points 
people in employment.148 Care leavers in education, 
training or employment have also now increased to 
65% in 2017-18, compared to 61% in 2016-17.
//
In 2016/17, in Northern Ireland, 30% more pupils 
who were entitled to Free School Meals (FSME) left 
secondary education without five A*-C grades than 
pupils who did not receive FSME. Over the same period 
the proportion of pupils achieving five A*-C grades 
and not in receipt of FSME increased 58.5% to 77.4%, 
while for those in receipt of FSME this attainment level 
increased from 26.4% to 47.5%.
//
A range of interventions have been aimed at improving 
the life chances of children and young people. The 
‘Sharing the Learning Programme’ in West Belfast 
is one such example. In 2017-18, the programme 
improved attainment levels across the education 
spectrum for children and young people experiencing 
disadvantage through poverty, exclusion and social, 
emotional and behavioural difficulties. The following 
was achieved:
//
i. 700 more families with nursery-aged children 
received support than planned.
ii. 662 additional 5 to 11-year-old children received 
literacy and numeracy support.
iii. 353 additional children and parents availed of the 
After Schools literacy and numeracy support and 
Family Learning.
iv. 233 children received support through the Summer 
Transition Programme.
v. 85% of parents of nursery children reported that 
they are involved with their children’s education 
at home and understand what is required of their 
child.
vi. 75% of participating children showed an increase 
in levels for literacy, numeracy and information and 
communications technology.
vii. 70% of participating schools demonstrated 
increased community use of schools.
viii. 64.3% of students involved in the programme 
achieved five or more GCSEs (A*-C) or equivalent 
including English and Maths.
//
Education is at the heart of the UK’s work to end 
extreme poverty and build a safer, more prosperous 
world. The UK has helped 11.4 million children to gain 
a decent education between 2015-18.
//
The UK’s Get Children Learning policy is focussed on 
helping the 330 million children in developing countries 
who are not expected to be able to read or do basic 
maths by the end of primary school. The UK works 
in close partnership with 23 countries to improve 
teaching, strengthen systems, and reach the most 
marginalised children. The UK supports a further 66 
countries through global programmes like the Global 
Partnership for Education (GPE). Through Education 
Cannot Wait the immense challenge of education 
in crises is addressed and through the Safe to Learn 
campaign work is done to end violence in schools.
//
In April 2018, the UK launched the Leave No Girl 
Behind campaign calling for 12 years of quality 
education for all girls. In June 2018, 152 UN Member 
States signed up to a UK-led joint statement on girls’ 
education. In tandem, the UK launched a second phase 
of the Girls’ Education Challenge supporting up to 1.5 
million marginalised girls with access to basic education 
and skills for life up to 2025.
//
By 2030, the UN estimates an additional 69 million 
skilled teachers will be required to deliver quality 
education for all. The UK supports the Education 
Workforce Initiative to develop, redesign, expand, and 
strengthen the global education workforce, improve 
education and meet demographic demands. Research 
in Ghana, Vietnam and Sierra Leone will develop 
practical options to tackle the challenge of workforce 
reform and inspire other governments to take action.
//
The British Council is the UK’s international 
organisation for cultural relations and educational 
opportunities. It supports international school links, 
studying English with UK institutions, studying for UK 
qualifications and attendance at major cultural events 
or exhibitions organised by a UK institution. A £2.5 
million International School Exchanges programme will 
give thousands of secondary pupils in England from 
disadvantaged backgrounds access to life-changing 
experiences and academic opportunities offered by 
overseas visits.
//
The International Citizen Service (ICS) has supported 
over 36,000 young people from the UK and overseas 
to volunteer on sustainable development projects. 
Placements are currently operating in Tanzania, 
Uganda, Nigeria, Kenya, Zambia, Cambodia, Nepal 
and Bangladesh. For instance, since 2016, 150 
ICS volunteers from the UK and Kenya have been 
supporting the community in Nandi, Kenya to reduce 
stigma and marginalisation for deaf and disabled 
community members.
//
The Commonwealth Scholarship Commission (CSC)
awards scholarships and fellowships to Commonwealth 
citizens for postgraduate study and professional 
development. Candidates are selected on merit and 
their potential to build expertise that will benefit the 
development of countries when grantees return home. 
Over £26 million in funding for 2018/19 will provide 
for approximately 750 new awards and support over 
950 students.
//
The UK’s International Education Strategy: global 
potential, global growth, published March 2019, 
sets out how the education sector will grow exports 
and exchange knowledge between and with other 
countries, while supporting the exchange and mobility 
of students and staff.
//
Tackling disadvantage and closing the attainment gap.
Socio-economic disadvantage remains a key factor 
for inequality in educational attainment. In 2018, 
the attainment gap in England, measured by the 
disadvantage gap index, had narrowed by 6.5% since 
2015 at primary school. In 2017/2018 the gap had 
narrowed by 3.1% by the end of secondary school 
compared to 2014/2015, but there is no room for 
complacency.
//
In England, innovative expansion of school-based 
nursery provision and training for early years 
professionals in disadvantaged areas will give children a 
better start at school. For pupils aged 5 to 16, the pupil 
premium provides £2.4 billion extra funding each year, 
so schools can arrange extra support and enrichment 
opportunities so disadvantaged pupils can realise their 
potential. Universities are working to open more places 
to students from poorer backgrounds by doubling the 
number of places offered to pupils who claimed free 
school meals. Scotland will further raise awareness of 
the Goals throughout learning in Scotland to galvanise 
action across society. Wales is identifying new and 
effective ways to measure and improve learner wellbeing. The Pupil Development Grant (PDG) is being 
expanded, building on its success in narrowing the 
attainment gap and breaking down the barriers faced 
by learners. In Northern Ireland, programmes such as 
the ‘Sharing the Learning Programme’ in West Belfast 
are demonstrating how educational outcomes of 
children in significant disadvantage can be improved.
//
The teacher workforce. 
The retention of early career teachers has been 
declining in recent years. In England, around 20% of 
new teachers leave the profession within their first two 
years of teaching, and around 30% leave within their 
first five years.
//
The 2019 Teacher Recruitment and Retention Strategy
aims to tackle these issues while the Early Career 
Framework will support early career teachers with 
an entitlement to a fully-funded, two-year package 
of structured support. In Wales, new professional 
standards will be developed for teachers and others 
in the education workforce focussing on the essential 
elements of successful teaching; as well as developing 
standards for support staff that can enable them to 
improve their skills, commit to professional learning 
and facilitate clearer pathways to the role of higher-level teaching assistant.
//
Improving provision.
In England, technical education performance needs 
to improve to boost productivity, close skills gaps and 
raise wages. At the heart of this change will be the 
new T Levels which give young people a clear path into 
skilled work. This system will be overseen by the new 
Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education in 
partnership with employers. In 2019, a review informed 
by independent advice from education, business and 
academia will determine how to improve the quality, 
choice and value for money of all post-18 education. 
//
In Wales, the new curriculum will address multiple 
challenges, including:
• perceived shortcomings in the current curriculum 
and assessment arrangements.
• OECD-reported low performance for a high 
proportion of learners, including relatively low 
performance in Programme for International Student 
Assessment (PISA) surveys. 
• the perception that prescriptive content and 
powerful accountability mechanisms have diminished 
the creative role of education professionals.
• features of the curriculum devised in 1988 which 
no longer reflect the world of technology and 
globalisation.
//
Wales will be using the new curriculum by September 
2022, after being finalised following feedback and 
refinement during 2019.
//
In Northern Ireland, over £77 million of targeted 
social need funding will be distributed to schools via 
the common funding formula. The funding is used 
to support pupils, by employing teachers, engaging 
with parents and communities, providing literacy and 
numeracy support, supporting transition between 
schools and supporting emotional health and well-being. A new online monitoring system introduced in 
2019 will enable schools to share good practice.
//
mproving outcomes for all women and girls is a must 
to help women realise their potential and ensure a 
society where no one is left behind.
//
In 2015, the EU Gender Equality Index ranked the 
UK sixth in the EU for its progress towards gender 
equality156 - unchanged since 2012 - due to some 
of the strongest legislation in the world protecting 
women’s rights and tackling discrimination. The 
Equality Act 2010 and the Public Sector Equality Duty
both work to prohibit direct and indirect discrimination, 
harassment, and victimisation.
//
Gender-based violence and harmful practices are 
pervasive, dangerous and must be eliminated. 
Whilst long-term overall decrease in the percentage of 
women who experienced partner abuse in the previous 
12 months has slowed in recent years, between 
2016/17 and 2017/18 there was a small increase from 
5.95% to 6.26%.
//
Whilst reporting of sexual violence has risen in recent 
years, there have been reductions in prosecutions and 
convictions for rape cases. In 2017/18, the volume 
of rape prosecutions fell by 13% to 4,517 and the 
volume of rape convictions fell by 11.9% to 2,635.
In response, the UK Government has committed to 
an ‘end to end’ review of the criminal justice system 
in England and Wales in relation to rape and serious 
sexual offences.
//
The UK government’s landmark draft Domestic Abuse 
Bill, published in January 2019, and the refreshed 
Violence Against Women and Girls Strategy (2019), 
both aim to prevent all forms of domestic abuse. 
Together, they will help to ensure that victims have 
the confidence to come forward and report their 
experience, knowing that the justice system and other 
agencies will do everything they can to protect and 
support them, and pursue their abuser.
//
This principle extends to victims of harmful practices 
like forced marriages, and FGM which has been illegal 
in the UK since 1985. In 2018, 0.6 per thousand 
women aged 20-24 had married by the age of 18, 
a small fall compared to the 2015 rate (0.8 per 
thousand). In 2017/18, there were 220 new cases of 
FGM per 1 million people in the UK, a slight increase 
from 205 in 2015/16.160 Changes in 2015 strengthened 
FGM law to make it a criminal offence for UK nationals 
to perform or arrange FGM overseas; increased the 
maximum prison sentence from 5 to 14 years; and 
allowed FGM victims to obtain lifelong anonymity. 
These changes, alongside FGM Protection Orders and 
a new duty for professionals to notify the police, if 
they discover that an act of FGM appears to have been 
carried out on a girl who is under 18, 
helped the UK secure its first conviction for FGM in 
February 2019.
//
The UK is committed to tackling modern slavery, 
including the trafficking of women and girls for sexual 
exploitation. A total of £11.6 million of additional 
funding has been invested in the police in England and 
Wales to develop dedicated modern slavery capabilities 
and the National Crime Agency has led multi-agency 
operations to target organised sexual exploitation.
//
The UK is clear that unlocking women’s economic 
potential will help deliver growth and prosperity for all.
//
Lives in the UK are being transformed with record 
numbers of women in work. In 2018, 71.2% of 
working women were in employment, an increase from 
68.9% three years earlier. However, women are still 
three times more likely to work part-time than men
and carry out 60% more unpaid care and domestic 
work. In 2016, the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
estimated that for every year spent out of paid work, 
women returning to work earn 2% less on average 
and 4% for highly-qualified women. To address 
some of these trends, Shared Parental Leave and 
Pay was introduced in 2015, which enables working 
parents to share up to 50 weeks of leave and up to 37 
weeks of pay in the first year of the child’s life.
//
Affordable, quality childcare is the key to unlocking 
women’s economic participation. In the UK, 74% of 
childcare time was carried out by women in 2015
and 89% of people who are inactive due to looking 
after the family and home are women. From 
September 2017, the childcare entitlement for working 
parents of 3- and 4-year olds, was doubled from 15 to 
30 hours a week in England. The most disadvantaged 
2-year-olds are entitled to 15 hours a week of free early 
education. Eligibility for the 30 hours entitlement is 
based on parental income (see Goal 4).
//
The national gender pay gap for full-time employees 
reached its lowest level of 8.6% in 2018, down from 
9.6% in 2015,167 following changes in workplace 
culture and the introduction of the UK’s world-leading 
pay gap regulations in 2017. In the first year (2018) of 
reporting, over 10,000 employers reported their gender 
pay data to government.168 In September last year, 
the UK announced a review led by Alison Rose into 
the barriers women face in setting up and growing a 
business. A response was published in March 2019.
//
There is also a higher percentage of women on boards 
of FTSE companies than ever before, with women 
holding 26.7% of seats in the FTSE 350 (up from 21.9% 
in 2015) and 30.2% in the FTSE 100 (up from 26.1% in 
2015).170 The percentage of managerial positions held 
by women has been gradually increasing over time, 
rising from 37.3% in 2015 to 37.9% in 2017.
//
The decision to open-up all combat roles to women is a 
defining moment in the history of the armed forces. 
Females were unable to serve in ground close combat 
roles until the ban was lifted in 2016. The Royal 
Armoured Corps, followed by the RAF Regiment, were 
the first to open its doors to female soldiers and officers.
From October 2018 all roles, including joining the Royal 
Marines, were opened to women. There were 20,480 
women serving in the armed forces as of October 
2018.172 Those currently serving can transfer into all 
roles and new recruits have begun basic training. 
This change will ensure that entry to the armed forces 
is determined by ability alone and not gender.
//
The UK’s second female Prime Minister entered office 
in 2016 and the first female Secretary of State for 
Defence was appointed in 2019. The UK currently 
has the most diverse Parliament in its history with the 
highest number of women Members of Parliament 
ever. Women represent 32% of MPs elected in 2017, 
an increase from 29% in 2015. Women also now 
hold more senior positions than before in the Senior 
Civil Service (42.7% in March 2018, an increase from 
38.9% in 2015),174 and the first female Commissioner 
of the Metropolitan Police in 2017.
//
Everyone should have control over their own bodies 
and their own futures. That means every girl and 
woman having access to the information they need; to 
choose what’s right for them, to support their decisions. 
Abortion is available in more limited circumstances in 
Northern Ireland than the rest of the UK.
//
7% of females in England aged between 13 and 54 
had at least one contact with a sexual reproduction 
and health service in 2017/2018, down from 8% in 
2014/15.
//
In England, teenage pregnancies are at the lowest rates 
ever recorded - the under-18 conception rate was 17.9 
conceptions per thousand women aged 15 to 17 years 
in 2017, a 15% decrease since 2015. To equip young 
people for adult life and to enable them to make 
a positive contribution to society, the UK is making 
Relationships Education compulsory in all primary 
schools, Relationships and Sex Education compulsory in 
all secondary schools and Health Education compulsory 
in all primary and secondary state-funded schools. A 
new scheme will also provide access to free period 
products in schools and 16-19 education institutions in 
England.
//
Scotland’s First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon MSP, 
was appointed as the first global advocate for the 
UN’s #HeforShe campaign and has made concrete 
commitments to advancing gender equality around the 
world and support UN Women in their work to end 
global gender inequality.
//
The National Advisory Council on Women and Girls 
advises the First Minister on what is needed to tackle 
gender inequality in Scotland.
//
Scotland has taken action to tackle gender-based 
inequality, such as period poverty with free sanitary 
products being made available to pupils, students and 
learners at schools, colleges and universities.
//
Scotland has a strong legislative framework, that in 
addition to wider provisions, includes:
• Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) 
Act 2005.
• Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) 
(Scotland) Act 2011.
• Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) 
Act 2015.
• Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2018.
//
Violence against women and girls is a challenge that 
requires a partnership response. The Equally Safe
approach in Scotland does this with government – 
national and local, delivery partners, networks and 
an underpinning framework to measure progress 
and performance.
//
The National Action Plan to Prevent and Eradicate 
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) is a partnership 
approach between Police Scotland, NHS, third sector, 
local authorities and the Scottish Government to 
prioritise the protection from and prevention of FGM; 
provide services and appropriate support for those 
who have experienced FGM and hold perpetrators 
to account.
//
Sustainable and inclusive growth sits alongside 
increased well-being at the heart of Scotland’s National 
Performance Framework and this Goal is important to 
achieve that aim. The gender employment and pay gap 
has narrowed considerably, but still exists.
//
The gender pay gap for full-time employees in Scotland 
has decreased from 6.6% in 2017 to 5.7% in 2018 the 
lowest gender pay gap on record for Scotland.177 The 
gender pay gap for all employees in Scotland has also 
decreased from 16% in 2017, to 15% in 2018.
//
In Scotland, public authorities with 20 or more 
employees must publish gender gap information and 
statements on equal pay. The Gender Pay Gap Action 
Plan includes a number of actions aimed at addressing 
occupational segregation, increasing the availability 
of well-paid flexible employment and improving the 
labour market conditions for women in Scotland. The 
action plan includes over 50 actions, including a grant 
scheme to help employers embed equality, and a 
Returners scheme to support around 2,000 women to 
return to the workplace after a break.
//
The commitment in Scotland to free early learning and 
childcare, with 1,140 hours per year from 2020 will 
further reduce barriers preventing parents from working.
//
The Scottish Government has a gender-balanced 
Cabinet, however only 35% of Members of Scottish 
Parliament (MSPs) in the Scottish Parliament and 29% 
of councillors in local government are women.
//
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) 
has launched a story sharing campaign and a safe 
online space which aims to provide peer support both 
for women considering entering local government and 
those already active within it. CoSLA has also identified 
actions to improve women’s representation in local 
government.
//
Further actions related to this Goal include:
• Gender Representation on Public Boards (Scotland) 
Act 2018 sets a gender representation objective for 
a public board that 50% of non-executive members 
should be women.
• Scottish Fire and Rescue Service launched a new 
recruitment campaign to find 300 new firefighters 
with specific actions to attract women applicants.
• Women in Agriculture Taskforce to tackle inequality 
and create equality of opportunity in Scottish 
agriculture.
//
Wales has ambitions to become a world leader for 
women’s rights and gender equality. The Gender 
Equality Review will submit its Phase 2 report in 
summer 2019 and will set out a roadmap for achieving 
gender equality in Wales and focussing on equality 
of outcome rather than equality of opportunity. 
The Welsh Government has announced capital 
and revenue funding to provide suitable dispensers 
and products in all schools in Wales and in Further 
Education establishments. The Welsh National Health 
Service (NHS) is also providing period products via 
Health Boards.
//
The gender pay gap has continued to narrow and is 
now one of the lowest levels on record in Wales. But 
Wales’s indicator shows women are less likely than 
men to be in good quality employment. As across 
the rest of the UK, employment rates in Wales are 
lower for women than for men – 70.6% for women 
and 78.9% for men in July 2018.181 Economic inactivity 
rates are higher for women (26.7%) than men 
(17.6%).182 On International Women’s Day 2018 the 
then First Minister announced his intention to “conduct 
a Rapid Review of our gender and equality policies 
and bring new impetus to our work”. The review has 
looked at what is already done well, identify what can 
be improved, and look at examples from governments 
around the world to learn from their models and 
practices. The roadmap which will be delivered as part 
of the Phase 2 activity will set out what needs to be 
done to achieve gender equality in Wales with a focus 
on equality of outcome.
//
Violence against women, domestic abuse and sexual 
violence (VAWDASV) is a fundamental violation of 
human rights, a cause and consequence of inequality 
and has far-reaching consequences for families, 
children and society as a whole. The Violence against 
Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence (Wales) 
Act 2015 is intended to ensure a focus across the 
public sector on the prevention of these issues, the 
protection of victims and the support for those affected 
by such issues.
//
The Welsh Government’s five-year national strategy 
lays out how the Act will be implemented and includes 
challenging the attitudes that underpin VAWDSV and 
the support that will be put in place for prevention, 
protection and support.
//
Wales’s National Strategy on Violence Against Women, 
Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence includes a 
commitment to challenge cultural attitudes which can 
underpin these traditional harmful practices. The Welsh 
Government is doing this with national campaigns, 
working with and supporting specialist BME violence 
against women services.
//
Wales is committed to supporting unpaid care givers. 
The delivery of enhanced rights for all carers is 
enshrined in the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) 
Act 2014. A new Ministerial Advisory Group for Carers 
was created in 2018, to bring together the public and 
third sectors to explore the issues and solutions, to the 
concerns of carers of all ages and genders.
//
Wales is working hard to give women and girls 
opportunities to fulfil their potential addressing gender 
equity in all STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, 
and Maths)-related funding. Welsh Government are 
tackling gender stereotyping around STEM— training 
physics teachers in gender-inclusive teaching methods 
and funding specific computer-coding workshops to 
engage and motivate girls. Wales’s STEM Cymru 2
programme aims to encourage more young women to 
progress into engineering careers. To date, over 3,000 
young women have engaged with the programme.
//
In 2019 the Welsh Government outlined its approach 
to supporting women entrepreneurs and published a 
good practice guide for business support organisations 
on how best to engage with women who are setting 
up or already running their own business.
//
A multi-agency Programme Board maintains oversight 
of the sexual health and services provided in Wales. 
In 2019, the programme board endorsed a national 
specification for sexual health services including 
improved access to contraception and abortion services.
//
The Welsh Government has issued a notification 
allowing the administration of the second abortion pill, 
misoprostol, in the home environment. Women will 
only require one appointment at a clinic, resulting in 
access at an earlier, safer stage of pregnancy.
//
Northern Ireland’s approach to sustainability is through 
the draft Programme for Government (PfG) Strategy. 
The primary aim is to mainstream sustainability 
in Departmental plans and actions. Part of the 
“mainstreaming” approach, which obviated the need 
for separate strategies, was to ensure that sustainability 
was reflected throughout the draft PfG. The Department 
of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) 
with the collaboration of other departments across 
the Northern Ireland Civil Service (NICS), completed an 
exercise mapping draft PfG outcomes and indicators to 
the Goals.
//
Providing women and girls with equal access 
to education, health care, decent work, and 
representation in political and economic decisionmaking processes will fuel sustainable economies and 
benefit societies and humanity at large. Implementing 
new legal frameworks regarding female equality in the 
workplace and the eradication of harmful practices 
targeted at women is crucial to ending the genderbased discrimination prevalent in many countries 
around the world.
//
The UK is supporting international progress towards 
gender equality targets across the Goals. Since the 
Goals were agreed in 2015, UK aid has provided 16.9 
million women and girls with modern methods of 
family planning; reached at least 8.2 million women 
and girls with humanitarian assistance; and supported 
5.6 million girls in gaining a decent education.
The UK’s funding has contributed to helping 24.5 
million people from 8,000 communities pledge to end 
FGM and more than 4.8 million people, including 
community members and religious leaders, to learn 
about the benefits of delaying marriage and keeping 
adolescent girls in school.
//
The UK is a global leader in tackling violence against 
women and girls (VAWG) in all its forms– be it domestic 
violence, sexual violence, FGM, or Child, Early and Forced 
Marriage. The UK’s flagship What Works to Prevent 
VAWG research programme works in 15 countries 
in Africa and Asia to understand and address the 
underlying causes of violence, to stop it from occurring 
and find interventions that can be taken to scale. In 
addition to generating evidence, the UK is contributing 
£21 million to organisations working to prevent VAWG 
and improve access to services for women and girls who 
experience violence. Since 2016, the UK has supported 
67 organisations in 46 countries.
//
The UK champions the Preventing Sexual Violence in 
Conflict Initiative (PSVI), working with international 
partners to tackle the stigma survivors face, strengthen 
justice for survivors and hold perpetrators to account, 
and prevent conflict-related sexual violence, including 
by tackling the root causes of gender inequality and 
discrimination.
//
In November 2018, Lord Ahmad, the Prime Minister’s 
Special Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence 
in Conflict hosted a PSVI film festival ‘Fighting Stigma 
through Film’ and will host the PSVI international 
conference in November 2019.
//
The UK announced in November 2018 a £50 million 
package to support an African-led movement to put an 
end to FGM by 2030 – the biggest single investment by 
an international donor.
//
The UK is also at the forefront of international efforts 
to end Child, Early and Forced Marriage. Through 
UK aid, 9 countries have been supported to develop 
National Action Plans to end child marriage and over 
1.12 million girls have been reached since 2015 with 
schooling initiatives, skills training and girls’ clubs to 
prevent and respond to child marriage.
//
Since the Forced Marriage Unit was established in 
2005, it has assisted in over 10,000 cases involving a 
victim or potential victim, in over 110 countries.
//
The UK’s is working overseas to reduce the vulnerability 
of women and girls to human trafficking. For instance, 
in Ethiopia, UK aid has provided health and educational 
support to over 200 girls who experienced or were at 
risk of exploitation, and in 2019 the UK launched a new 
media campaign with Nigeria’s anti-trafficking agency 
to prevent women from being trafficked to the UK.
//
The UK is committed to improving the opportunities 
for women to have a say in decisions that affect their 
lives. For example, in Pakistan, the Conflict, Stability 
and Security Fund (CSSF) provided support to Pakistan’s 
Election Commission’s campaign to bolster women’s 
participation in elections through civic outreach, street 
theatre, social media and radio. The campaign directly 
facilitated 405,000 women to acquire National Identity 
Cards190 and UK support led to an addition of 4.3 
million more women to the electoral roll.
//
In November 2018, the UK Parliament and government 
jointly hosted over 100 female parliamentarians 
from around the world to promote women’s political 
participation at the Women MPs of the World 
Conference.
//
At the 2018 Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Meeting (CHOGM) the UK committed to a £1.6 million 
project to increase women’s meaningful participation 
in peace processes, including through the Women 
Mediators across the Commonwealth (WMC) initiative.
//
The UK is a world leader in promoting and supporting 
sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR). Since 
2015, UK aid has provided 16.9 million women and 
girls with modern methods of family planning. At the 
UK’s 2017 Family Planning Summit, the UK committed 
to spend an average of £225 million per year on family 
planning (2017/18-2021/22). It is estimated that, every 
year, UK investment will support nearly 20 million total 
users of contraception, prevent 6 million unintended 
pregnancies, and thus prevent more than 3 million 
abortions, many of which would be unsafe. It will 
save the lives of over 6,000 women every year. On 
maternal and child health UK government invested 
an average of approximately £1 billion per year across 
bilateral programmes and multilateral organisations 
from 2014-2017.
//
Progressing women’s economic empowerment 
and closing the gender pay gap.
In England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
having access to a better job is important in addressing 
inequalities. Employment brings a range of benefits 
to individuals and communities by increasing levels of 
health, confidence, self-respect and social inclusion.
//
On closing the gender pay gap, reporting is just the 
first step. What matters most is that employers now 
take action to close their gender pay gaps. The UK 
is urging employers to develop an action plan to 
identify and tackle the causes of their gender pay 
gap. Evidence-based guidance has been published to 
support employers to take the most effective action.
//
Increasing women and girls’ participation in STEM.
The UK is investing in a number of programmes 
that aim to increase girls’ engagement in science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) 
subjects, to ensure girls and boys can succeed 
on an equal basis. This includes the Stimulating 
Physics Network which is rolling out tried and tested 
approaches to improve engagement by girls in physics, 
the Advanced Mathematics Support Programme, and 
a new £84 million programme to drive up participation 
in computer science which will include some focus on 
improving participation by girls. Making girls aware of 
the range of careers to which studying STEM subjects 
can lead is also important and the Government funds 
initiatives such as the STEM Ambassadors Programme 
that brings STEM business and industry representatives 
into schools.
//
Tackling violence against women and girls around 
the world.
The UK recognises that much more needs to be done 
to prevent the extremely high levels of violence that 
women and girls experience every day around the 
world. Investment in generating evidence of what 
works to prevent VAWG, particularly amongst the most 
marginalised, including adolescent girls and women 
and girls with disabilities continues, whilst advocacy 
for greater investment in interventions to prevent and 
respond to VAWG is also being scaled up.
//
Global rollback on women’s rights.
There is an increasingly coordinated and effective 
opposition to women’s rights, including women’s 
and girls’ access to SRHR, education and preventing 
violence against women and girls. Whilst these 
concerns are not new, this opposition appears to 
now be more coordinated, better funded and able 
to mobilise more efficiently than ever before. This is 
creating a more hostile global environment on gender 
equality, with hard-won global norms protecting girls 
and women being challenged. The UK will stand by its 
commitment to promote gender equality and women’s 
empowerment in the face of this challenge.
//
Today over 99.8% of UK drinking water samples 
meet applicable national standards.201 According 
to the World Health Organization and UNICEF 
Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and 
Sanitation, 96% of the UK has access to safe water.202
Public health problems related to water supply and 
sanitation are now a rare event. UK law prevents water 
companies from being able to cut off customers’ 
supplies, water and sewage connections.
//
Despite these positive headline figures there remains 
a challenge on access and affordability for some of 
the more vulnerable sections of society. All water 
companies must manage customer debt and ability-topay issues. Relevant national legislation (including the 
Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 
1992) requires employers to provide access to adequate 
facilities for workers including toilets, washing, eating 
and drinking facilities.
//
The UK is working to make it easier for people to 
access clean drinking water at refill points whilst 
reducing plastic waste (see also Goals 12 and 14). 
There are now over 14,000 refill points on City to Sea’s 
free Refill app and they aim to double this by 2020.
//
The UK has a successful system for the provision of 
clean water and sanitation services and every day over 
11 billion litres of waste water are collected by over 
624,200 kilometres of sewers in the UK. In England 
and Wales these services are mainly provided by water 
companies and regulated by Ofwat, the Environment 
Agency or Natural Resources Wales and the Drinking 
Water Inspectorate.
//
Water companies can decide whether to bring 
forward a social tariff as part of a coherent package of 
support to enable customers to pay their bills. Other 
support can include help with metering, payment 
methods, debt advice and water efficiency measures. 
The Consumer Council for Water has continued to 
work with water companies to expand and increase 
awareness of the help available. At the end of 2017-18 
there were 393,143 customers in England and Wales 
receiving help through social tariffs, a 51% increase on 
2016-17 and an increase of 191% from 2015-16.205
The WaterSure scheme also enables water suppliers 
to cap bills for those low-income customers who 
are using a lot of water for essential family or health 
reasons (also Goal 1). The Digital Economy Act 2017,
which allows data sharing between water companies 
and other organisations (including UK government 
departments such as the Department for Work and 
Pensions) will make it easier to identify and provide 
support to vulnerable customers who might need help 
with their bills.
//
Since 1994 water leakage in England and Wales has 
fallen by a third.206 Further progress has slowed in 
recent years, and in 2017-18 leakage remained at 
around 22% of supply (approximately 3 billion litres of 
water per day in England and Wales or 123 litres per 
day per property). The UK government has given a 
clear message that water companies must do more 
to reduce leakage in the long term. Water companies 
have since proposed an average leakage reduction of 
16% by 2025. The water industry has also committed 
to reducing leakage by 50% by 2050. This would 
reduce overall leakage to 10% of supply.
//
Since 1999/2000, household water consumption in 
England has decreased from 150 litres per person per 
day to 141 in 2017/18. This is slightly up from the 
2015/16 average of 139 litres per person per day. 
A call for evidence will be launched in 2019 on setting 
an ambitious target for personal water consumption 
alongside a consultation on the policy options required 
to support this target.
//
River Basin Management plans (RBMPs) are strategies 
for managing the UK water environment. They are the 
main vehicle for achieving the water quality ambition 
set out in the UK government’s 25 Year Environment 
Plan: to return, as soon as practicable, at least threequarters of waters to close to their natural state. The 
current 2015 RBMPs confirmed over £3 billion of 
investment in the water environment over six years. 
In England over 5,000km of surface water has been 
enhanced, moving towards the target of 8,600km by 
2021.
//
An abstraction plan is being implemented to make 
sure a more sustainable level of water is taken from the 
environment. This adopts a more catchment-focussed 
approach to facilitate improved trading and sharing 
of water resources whilst reducing pressure on fragile 
habitats. A report was laid before the UK Parliament 
in 2019 to demonstrate the progress made under the 
plan since 2017.
//
Over the last 30 years, there has been good progress 
on water quality after more than a century of poorly 
regulated industrial practices. England now has 
consistently high levels of clean bathing waters, serious 
pollution incidents are declining and rivers that were 
biologically dead are reviving. There have been huge 
strides made since the early 1990s, when just 28% of 
bathing waters in England met the top water quality 
standards that were then in force. In 2018, 97.9% of 
bathing waters tested at over 400 beaches and lakes 
across England passed the applicable standards.
//
However, challenges remain. For example, while nitrate 
levels in rivers and lakes are declining steadily, the 
British Geological Society estimates this decline will 
not be mirrored in groundwaters for another 60 years 
due in some cases to the time lapse as nitrate moves 
through the strata to the aquifer. Phosphorus levels 
in rivers have been decreasing since the mid-1990s, in 
parallel with improvements at sewage treatment works. 
However, phosphates remain the principal reason for 
rivers not achieving good status.
//
While the number of serious pollution incidents in 
England fell to 419 in 2017, down 18% on 2016214
challenges such as diffuse pollution and overabstraction remain. Updated 2015 RBMPs include 
new rules for farmers to tackle diffuse pollution and 
introduced Countryside Stewardship, a £400 million 
agri-environment scheme in England for 2014-
20. Water companies are also complementing this 
investment with £3.5 billion over 2014-19. Domestic 
and European law requires the Environment Agency to 
review and update RBMPs by the end of 2021.
//
The UK government is developing a national 
policy statement (NPS) in 2019 for water resources 
infrastructure, to support the delivery of nationallysignificant water resources infrastructure including 
water transfers, reservoirs and desalination plants. The 
NPS will assist and streamline the planning process for 
the development of large water resources infrastructure 
to meet water supply needs.
//
The water industry has invested more than £150 billion 
in infrastructure over the last 30 years. It is delivering 
a £44 billion investment programme over 2015-20 
and companies have proposed investing a further 
£50 billion across 2020-25. Part of this investment 
includes the Thames Tideway Tunnel, or the London 
super sewer, which will capture almost all of the 18 
million tonnes of sewage that currently overflows into 
the River Thames each year. Protecting the Thames 
from sewage will significantly improve the river’s water 
quality and biodiversity. It will also boost economic 
growth across the capital, generating thousands of 
jobs and bringing social benefits. The Thames Tideway 
Tunnel will be the largest project of its type in Europe 
and will be operational by 2023.
//
Water companies are expected to assess demand 
management and new supply options in the light of 
future challenges, such as the environmental needs set 
out in RBMPs, population growth and climate change. 
Water companies should see what solutions provide 
for resilient water supplies while offering best value to 
customers in the longer term. Water companies must 
consult on their plans.
//
The UK government is looking at legislative changes 
that would improve collaboration in water resources 
planning between water companies and other 
water-using sectors. It is also looking to strengthen 
the legislative framework to make the current 
non-statutory drainage and wastewater planning 
process a statutory requirement.
//
Communities and voluntary organisations are also 
now being engaged in the planning and practical 
delivery of environmental outcomes. The Catchment 
Based Approach is an example of where an integrated 
approach to local community engagement is delivering 
cost-effective improvements to the water environment. 
Partnerships work to embed a more strategic, 
catchment-wide approach to managing water, water 
resources and flood risk whilst also generating a range 
of other social and economic benefits.
//
Scotland is committed to being a ‘Hydro Nation’ where 
Scotland’s water environment is managed to best 
advantage and Scotland’s knowledge and expertise is 
applied at home and internationally.
//
Universal access to safe and clean water and access 
to sanitation are met in Scotland. Publicly-owned 
Scottish Water provide water and waste water services. 
Around 3.6% of Scotland’s population are served 
by private water supplies and approximately 7% by 
private sewerage arrangements. Local authorities 
regulate private water supplies with oversight by the 
Drinking Water Quality Regulator for Scotland. Where 
there is an emergency, such as in the summer of 2018, 
local authorities and Scottish Water work together to 
provide emergency supplies of water to homes and 
businesses served by private supplies.
//
The importance of water to Scotland’s well-being 
and economy is recognised in legislation: the Water 
Resources (Scotland) Act 2013 places a duty on Scottish 
Ministers to develop the value of water resources in a 
responsible way.
//
Actions to make progress on this Goal include:
• ‘Your Water, Your Life’ campaign, launched in June 
2018 to encourage people to use refillable bottles 
and top up from the tap to improve Scotland’s health 
and environmental footprint.
• Joining the international trend of Blue-Green 
cities, bringing water management and green 
infrastructure together to provide high quality places 
for public amenity and help reduce flooding.
• Scotland is one of 12 pilot countries testing the 
Indicator Framework to measure, test and take 
action to collectively strengthen water policies.
//
Scottish Water is taking specific action in rural areas, 
including trials on small community supply water 
treatment technologies. Research is being conducted to 
help build criteria for identifying rural communities that 
are most in need of water infrastructure support.
//
The current condition of water bodies in Scotland 
is improving, however a wide range of pressures 
are continuing to impact on the condition of a 
small number of water bodies and protected areas. 
Improvement measures to raise 87% of water bodies 
to ‘good’ status by 2027 are prioritised through RBMPs. 
There is also continued effort to prevent deterioration 
of water bodies from ‘high’ and ‘good’ status.
//
The risk of flooding remains a concern. 108,000 
properties are at risk of flooding, 73% of them 
residential with £252 million expected annual flood 
damage in the 2016-2021 period.217 The Flood Risk 
Management (Scotland) Act 2009 has led to a range of 
flood risk management strategies being implemented 
between 2016 and 2021. Taking a catchment-scale 
approach and action based on risk-based decisions 
there are 42 prioritised flood protection schemes across 
the strategies that will reduce the risk of flooding in 
communities.
//
2020 has been designated the Year of Coasts and 
Waters in Scotland, that will spotlight and promote 
opportunities to experience and enjoy Scotland’s 
natural assets responsibly.
//
Water is one of Wales’s greatest natural assets and an 
integral part of Welsh culture, heritage and national 
identity. In 2015 Welsh Government published the 
Water Strategy for Wales which aims is to ensure 
a more integrated and sustainable approach to 
managing water and associated services in Wales.
//
Wales is served by two water companies, Dwr Cymru/
Welsh Water and Hafren Dyfrdwy. Approximately 
80,000 people rely on a private water supply. The two 
water companies operate a number of water treatment 
plants and distribution networks which treat and 
convey water and ensure that it is of an appropriate 
standard for public consumption. In 2017, the figure 
for public water supply compliance with the Drinking 
Water Directive in Wales was 99.96%. For private 
supply it was 95.3% which is at the highest compliance 
level since introducing drinking water standards.
//
Affordability is a key priority as set out in the Welsh 
Strategic Priorities Statement to Ofwat. It is expected 
that social tariffs will be available for those who 
struggle to pay and for companies and Ofwat
to consider the appropriate balance between 
short-term affordability and the need to safeguard 
future generations. There are now over 160,000 people in Wales 
benefitting from social tariffs in Wales.
//
Water quality has improved dramatically over the last 
25 years with all 104 Welsh designated bathing waters 
meeting the minimum EU standard.
//
In Wales, 37% of water bodies and achieving good 
status under the Water Framework Directive.220
There are a number of reasons why water bodies 
are failing to meet good status including agricultural 
pollution, legacy abandoned metal mines and Water 
Company discharges.
//
The Metal Mine Strategy for Wales looks to restore 
rivers back to health. Natural Resources Wales (NRW) 
is leading on a metal mine remediation programme for 
Wales with support from the Coal Authority.
//
According to NRW, the water quality in rivers has 
generally improved over the last 25 years, mainly 
as a result of improvements to sewage discharges. 
Furthermore, upland lakes and rivers show sustained 
recovery from the harmful effects of acid rain.
//
Wales’s not-for-profit water company, Dwr Cymru/
Welsh Water (DCWW), have delivered the biggest 
leakage percentage reduction in the industry over the 
last five years.221 This has been achieved by applying 
innovation, better use of analytics and metering, and 
smart network management. A 15% reduction in the 
volume of leakage is planned by 2025.
//
Water efficiency is also encouraged through 
longstanding behavioural change campaigns, and free 
meter installation.
//
Amendments have been made to the Building 
Regulations in Wales to introduce a new requirement 
that where a dwelling is erected the potential 
consumption of wholesome water by persons must not 
exceed 110 litres per person per day.
//
Unlike the rest of the UK, Wales does not have 
groundwater supplies, and must therefore try to 
capture and store most water in reservoirs. To ensure 
robust and resilient water resources, Wales is proposing 
to change the current abstraction licensing system in 
conjunction with the UK government.
//
The Welsh Government has introduced legislation 
to make it a requirement for new developments to 
be built in accordance with statutory standards for 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS). SuDS aim to 
manage rainfall in a way similar to natural processes 
making use of the landscape and natural vegetation 
to control the flow and volume of surface water. 
SuDS can improve the management of Wales’s water 
environment leading to reduced flood risk, improved 
water quality and enhanced biodiversity.
//
During the development of Welsh Water 2050, DCWW 
engaged and consulted with relevant stakeholders to 
ensure their informed views were captured and helped 
shape the final form of the document.
//
The water companies in Wales carry out extensive 
consumer research and engagement in the 
development of their business plans. In the Strategic 
Priorities Statement to Ofwat Wales set out a clear 
objective in respect of customer and stakeholder 
priorities in shaping business plans.
//
Northern Ireland Water is a Government Owned 
Company which provides water and sewerage services 
in Northern Ireland including 570 million litres of clean 
water a day for almost 1.8 million people as well as 
treating 340 million litres of wastewater a day.
//
In 2017 Northern Ireland Water achieved its best-ever 
drinking water quality and also achieved its target for 
wastewater compliance.
//
The Northern Ireland Department of Agriculture, 
Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) publishes Water 
Framework Directive (WFD) Statistics relating to water 
quality in Northern Ireland every three years. The 2018 
WFD Statistics report indicated that 31.3% of 450 river 
water bodies were classified as ‘high’ or ‘good’ quality, 
compared to 32.7% in 2015. The report also indicated 
that 10 of 25 marine water bodies were classified at 
‘high’ or ‘good’ status compared to 9 classified at 
‘high’ or ‘good’ status in 2015.
//
DAERA’s new agricultural-environment scheme, the 
Environmental Farming Scheme (EFS) aims to address 
specific environmental needs, primarily related to 
biodiversity and water quality. The scheme, one of 
DAERA’s largest with a projected budget of £112 
million up to 2025, opened for applications in 2017. 
As of March 2019, there are 3,111 agreements in place 
and further application tranches are planned.
//
DAERA is considering further options aimed at 
improving water quality through reducing nutrient 
levels in waterbodies including excess phosphorus. 
Monitoring data (from 2017) published in May 2018 
shows that soluble reactive phosphorus (P) in rivers is 
rising. Whilst the increase is marginal, it is a cause for 
concern that there are early signs of an upward trend 
despite the measures deployed by the department to 
reduce pollution from agricultural sources. It is highly 
likely that pressures will increase in 2018 due to low 
grass yields and an observed increase in the use of 
concentrate feeds. Northern Ireland data on winter 
dissolved inorganic nitrogen show a potential decrease 
on the 2015 baseline year. However, further years 
of data are required to assess whether this is a positive 
trend.
//
Representatives from across the water sector in 
Northern Ireland are currently working with colleagues 
from across central and local government, with support 
from the private sector, to develop a Strategic Drainage 
Plan for Belfast which will protect Belfast from 
flooding, enhance the environment and enable the city 
to grow.
//
The UK contributes to delivery of Goal 6 around the 
world through the UK government’s Department 
for International Development (DFID) investments in 
water and sanitation programmes at country level, 
and through support to the global architecture and 
influencing on water and sanitation at international 
level.
//
The UK promotes safe and affordable drinking water 
and sanitation by funding water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WASH) through bilateral programmes in 
28 countries. In addition, UK core contributions to 
multilateral development bodies, primarily the World 
Bank and African Development Bank, support WASH. 
Between 2015 and 2018, the UK helped 40.3 million 
people gain access to water and sanitation.
//
Current forecasts indicate that the UK will have helped 
over 60 million people gain access by 2020.
//
In order to Leave No One Behind, the UK runs 
international programmes that focus on those people 
who continue to lack access to water and sanitation, 
with a focus on the poorest. Work on WASH has 
focussed on rural areas because this is where the needs 
are typically greatest. The UK works to address the 
rights of women and girls to access WASH services; 
women and girls need safe, private, hygienic and 
convenient WASH facilities, and good WASH facilities 
are also necessary for menstrual hygiene. Results 
are disaggregated by gender and programmes now 
increasingly collect data disaggregated by disability. UKfunded programmes have ensured that at least 13.7 
million women and girls were provided with access to 
WASH between 2015 and 2018.
//
The UK supports the global architecture related to Goal 
6 to provide robust evidence for decision-making and 
support countries in developing strategies for financing 
and delivering sustainable services. This includes 
support to the Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP), 
the Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation 
and Drinking water programme (GLAAS), and the 
Sanitation and Water for All partnership (SWA).
//
UK water security and transboundary water 
management programmes are contributing to Goal 6. 
For example, the UK’s Water Security Programme has 
supported over 23 million people to become more 
resilient to climate change, by improving sustainable 
access to quality water resources and reducing 
water-related risks such as floods and droughts.
//
The UK is helping build cooperation within 
transboundary river basins in Central and South Asia, 
and sub-Saharan Africa.
//
The UK’s work on this Goal is supported by its 
wide-ranging expertise. The UK has a unique set of 
centres of excellence on water and sanitation, including 
the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 
the Universities of Leeds, Oxford, Loughborough, 
East Anglia and University College London. UK 
consulting companies have world-class engineering, 
science and management expertise which is sought 
by governments and agencies across the world. Nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) such as WaterAid, 
Oxfam and Plan are key partners in delivering WASH 
programmes.
//
Other UK institutions such as the British Geological 
Society contribute vital expertise to research 
programmes such as Unlocking the Potential of 
Groundwater for the Poor (UPGro), funded by DFID, 
the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) and 
the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). 
The UK is also working with the Met Office and other 
partners in Yemen to improve the forecasting of where 
cholera is likely to occur, to enable earlier preparedness 
and action.
//
Climate change, population growth and changes in 
consumer behaviour are putting increasing pressure 
on the water sector in England. The UK government 
is committed to a twin track approach to securing 
resilient water supplies, which requires both new water 
resources infrastructure and further action to reduce 
the demand for water.
//
Collaborative working at the river catchment scale 
is beginning to demonstrate real improvements in 
tackling diffuse pollution and improving water quality. 
As a result, this way of working is being extended to 
other challenges such as managing water abstraction 
and working with natural processes to deliver flood risk 
management.
//
Resilience to climate extremes is a challenge and there 
is a strong linkage to actions and challenges in Goal 13. 
Reducing water consumption is both a challenge and 
next step. Scottish Water will promote increased water 
efficiency, reduce energy consumption in water and 
waste water services and produce renewable energy 
from water resources and assets.
//
Northern Ireland Water Limited continues to enhance 
the existing network to meet new demand and 
upgrade the existing infrastructure to ensure sustained 
service delivery and environmental performance. It 
aims to become more resilient and sustainable to meet 
future challenges, for example from climate change 
and a growing and ageing population. Sustainable 
Water – A Long Term Water Strategy for Northern 
Ireland (2015-2040) presents a clear framework for 
action which will facilitate implementation of a range 
of initiatives aimed at delivering the long-term vision to 
have a sustainable water sector in Northern Ireland.
//
Different parts of the UK can face very different 
weather conditions. Some areas suffer significant 
levels of water stress which put the health of the 
freshwater environment at risk; climate change is likely 
to exacerbate this along with population growth in 
areas where water is already scarce. There has been an 
increasing focus on reforming the licensing regime for 
water abstraction in recent years. The UK government 
is implementing an Abstraction Plan to put withdrawals 
onto a more sustainable level. A catchment-focussed 
approach aims to facilitate improved trading and 
sharing of water resources whilst reducing pressure on 
the most fragile habitats.
//
Improving the energy efficiency of buildings not only 
cuts emissions, it can help slash energy bills too – 
between 2010 and 2018, energy bills for the average 
household in the UK fell by 14% in real terms. 
Tenants in England and Wales living in Band F and G 
rated homes will save on average £180 per year due 
to the new Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards 
for privately rented homes, which require landlords 
to improve properties to at least Band E or seek an 
exemption.
//
The Domestic Gas and Electricity (Tariff Cap) Act 2018 
also introduced a ‘price cap’ on the rates that energy 
suppliers can charge consumers on standard variable 
and default energy tariffs. The price cap came into 
effect in January 2019 and will save the average dual-fuel (gas and electricity) consumer in the UK around 
£75 to £100 per year.
//
In the UK, fuel poverty is devolved; each nation has 
powers to set their own target and strategy. 
In England, the fuel poverty target is to improve fuel 
poor homes to energy efficiency Band C by 2030. 
An updated fuel poverty strategy for England is 
expected by 2020. Under the Warm Home Discount 
Scheme, 2 million low income and fuel poor 
households benefit from a rebate of £140 off their 
energy bills each winter. £2.4 billion of assistance 
has been provided to these households up to winter 
2018/19.
//
The smart meter rollout across England, Scotland and 
Wales will lay the foundation for a cheaper, cleaner 
and more efficient energy system and is essential for 
getting more out of low carbon technologies like 
electric vehicles and electric heating, and more energy 
from renewable sources. As of 31 March 2019, there 
were over 14.3 million smart and advanced meters 
in operation. On a larger scale, the £18 million 
Industrial Heat Recovery Support programme and the 
£315 million Industrial Energy Transformation Fund are 
supporting industry to use heat more efficiently.
//
The UK has very high levels of energy security. It 
works with a range of sectors to ensure that the 
energy supply is balanced – with a diverse range of 
supply sources and sufficient delivery capacity to meet 
demand – and can respond effectively to changes 
affecting that balance.
//
The Capacity Market, introduced by the UK 
government in 2014, enables Great Britain to maintain 
security of supply at the lowest cost to consumers, 
by providing a level playing field for all technologies 
and the right investment signals for a mix of capacity. 
Work towards an increase in interconnection capacity 
continues, by ensuring a stable regime under which 
interconnector developers can bring forward projects 
to enable access to cheaper electricity from Europe at 
times of peak demand. The UK is also investing in a 
wide range of innovative technologies to ensure it can 
maintain secure supplies while cutting emissions in 
future.
//
The UK leads the G20 in cutting emissions while 
delivering sustained economic growth, largely due to 
rapid progress transitioning from fossil fuels to low 
carbon and renewable alternatives. Almost 53% 
of the electricity powering homes and businesses in 
the UK in 2018 came from clean sources, including 
33% from renewables.235 Coal’s share was only 5%, 
continuing strong progress towards the commitment to 
completely phase out its use by 2025.
//
A collective effort across society has been crucial to 
this, with over £92 billion invested in clean energy 
in the UK between 2010 and 2018, according to 
Bloomberg New Energy Finance.237 As of May 2019, 
there were more than 100 green bonds listed on the 
London Stock Exchange, raising over US$26 billion.
//
This investment has enabled the UK to have the largest 
offshore wind capacity in the world, with 34% of 
global capacity in 2018, and ensured the UK remains a 
world leader in innovation.239 The world’s first floating 
wind farm opened off the coast of Scotland in 2017 
and the UK has allocated up to £557 million for future 
Contracts for Difference auctions, a commitment which 
could see offshore wind contributing up to 30GW of 
generating capacity by 2030.
//
The UK has also invested in technologies and 
approaches to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 
heating. The Renewable Heat Incentive is expected 
to save approximately 137 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e) of greenhouse gas 
emissions over the course of its lifetime and £320 
million is going towards a flagship Heat Networks 
Investment Project.
//
In the Road to Zero Strategy and the Automotive 
Sector Deal, the UK government and industry have set 
out how together they will deliver the UK’s transition to 
low carbon vehicles. This includes £1.5 billion in public 
investment until 2021, an £108 million national battery 
scale-up facility, and actions on deployment, design, 
manufacture, and infrastructure.
//
After receiving advice from the Committee on Climate 
Change, an independent, statutory body established 
under the Climate Change Act 2008 to provide expert 
advice to government on climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, the UK government has laid draft 
legislation to set a new net zero greenhouse gas 
emissions target for the UK, to be delivered by 2050. 
This world-leading target will end the UK’s contribution 
to climate change.
//
The percentage of energy consumption from 
renewable sources has increased steadily in Scotland 
over time, with 20% of Scotland’s heat, transport and 
electricity consumption met by renewable sources in 
2017. Scotland’s renewable energy capacity has also 
shown steady growth and in 2017, 70% of Scotland’s 
electricity demand was from renewables and 6% of 
non-electrical heat demand was from renewables.
//
Scotland’s Energy Strategy 2017 focusses on the need 
for an inclusive transition to a low carbon future and 
sets two ambitious targets for 2030: the equivalent 
of 50% of Scotland’s heat, transport and electricity 
consumption to be met from renewable sources; 
and an increase of 30% in the productivity of energy 
use across the Scottish economy. Other targets to be 
achieved by 2020 include: 100% of electricity demand 
to come from renewables; 11% non-electrical heat 
demand to come from renewables; 12% reduction in 
energy consumption; and 10% share of renewable 
fuels in transport petrol and diesel consumption.
//
Scotland’s ambition to be a world leader in affordable 
and clean energy is shared across the public, private 
and third sectors. This ambition is being progressed 
through legislation, local and national government 
policy, community action and a focus on corporate 
sustainability.
//
Heating and cooling Scotland’s homes and 
businesses costs £2.6 billion a year and accounts 
for approximately half of Scotland’s greenhouse gas 
emissions. Scotland’s 20-year delivery programme 
– Energy Efficient Scotland – is a strategic partnership 
between national and local government to improve 
the use and management of energy in buildings and 
help decarbonise the heat supply. The programme 
also supports area-based schemes that reinforce local 
energy efficiency measures to lift people out of fuel 
poverty.
//
The discussion paper on Decarbonising Scotland’s 
Industrial Sector and Sites identifies barriers to 
investment in decarbonisation, references support 
available and sets out the next steps to create an 
improved Scottish support framework.
//
Transport’s percentage share of total net emissions has 
increased in recent years as non-transport emissions 
have fallen. Actions for ‘electrification’ of Scotland’s 
roads to support the target of no new petrol or diesel 
cars and vans by 2032 include a network of charge 
points in homes, businesses and communities; 
interest-free loans for purchase of low emission 
vehicles; and low emission zones transforming towns 
and cities into cleaner, healthier places to live, work 
and visit.
//
Wales’s highest priority is to reduce energy demand 
wherever possible and affordable. Expectations are 
that overall power demand will increase as a result of 
growing electrification of transport. To ensure future 
demand can be met, significant investment will be 
needed in low carbon energy generation, transmission 
and distribution infrastructure.
//
Between 2011 and March 2018, Wales invested more 
than £248 million in the Warm Homes Programme to 
improve the energy efficiency of over 50,800 homes 
throughout Wales, making them warmer and more 
affordable to heat.
//
Between 2016 and 2018, Wales invested £44.5 million 
and secured a further £5.7 million from the Energy 
Company Obligation. During this period, 11,000 
homes were improved, and 29,000 households were 
provided free impartial advice. The percentage of 
households in Wales in fuel poverty has reduced from 
29% in 2012 to 23% in 2016.
//
Good energy performance in housing reduces energy 
demand in the domestic sector and helps homeowners 
and tenants manage the costs of maintaining a warm 
home. The Welsh Housing Quality Standard for existing 
social housing includes achieving an energy efficiency 
standard of Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) 65 
or higher. This is the equivalent to Energy Performance 
Certificates (EPC) D rating on a scale of A to G. 
Currently 200,431 (89%) social homes have achieved 
SAP 65 or higher and work will continue on this up to 
and beyond 2020.
//
Wales’s Low Carbon Delivery Plan sets out the ambition 
for low carbon electricity to become the main source of 
energy in Wales. Affordable and low carbon energy is a 
key objective to achieving prosperity in Wales.
//
The Welsh Government accepted the Committee 
on Climate Change’s recommendation for a 95% 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 and 
wants to reach net zero. Wales aims for 70% of 
electricity consumption to be met from renewable 
sources by 2030. Wales also has a target for 1 GW 
of renewable energy capacity in Wales to be locally 
owned by 2030; and an expectation for all new 
renewable energy projects to have at least an element 
of local ownership from 2020. In 2018, Wales held 
a call for evidence on the benefits of, and challenges 
in, increasing locally-owned energy generation 
and delivering the 1 GW local ownership target. It 
demonstrated that increasing local ownership of 
energy generation within Wales is likely to increase 
prosperity.
//
Approximately 22% of total electricity generated in 
Wales in 2017 was from renewables. Wales is a net 
exporter of electricity, the electrical generation potential 
from renewable energy installations in 2017 was 
estimated to be equivalent to 48% of Welsh electricity 
consumption.
//
Regional and local energy planning is being taken 
forward to accelerate the deployment of renewable 
generation in Wales. The installation of renewable 
energy generation capacity has increased in pace in 
recent years with the capacity of technologies such as 
solar panels more than doubling from 2014-16, and 
onshore wind capacity showing a 50% increase.
//
This approach to energy planning also aims to 
encourage increased local ownership of energy 
developments. The Welsh Government has 
commissioned evidence on the potential resources 
in Wales for onshore and offshore wind and solar 
resource and is considering the implications of this 
work for spatial planning and infrastructure.
//
Wales has an opportunity to take advantage of its 
marine natural resources. Wales has established 
two demonstration zones, which provides testbed 
opportunities for wave and tidal stream devices. This 
industry has the potential to offer a global solution to 
decarbonising energy generation. It is already providing 
economic opportunities in deprived coastal areas in 
Wales.
//
Wales has called for its public sector to be carbon 
neutral by 2030. This requires large scale delivery 
of renewable energy and energy efficiency projects 
within the public sector. To help deliver emissions 
savings, the Welsh Government considers carbon 
impact when allocating capital funding. All new 
health and education buildings funded through Welsh 
Government capital are designed and built to maximise 
energy efficiency. Funding is conditional on projects 
being designed to achieve an A rating on EPCs, as 
well as an excellent accreditation under the Building 
Research Establishment Environmental Assessment 
Methodology to demonstrate sustainability.
//
As well as raising the standards for new buildings, 
Wales is developing a long-term retrofit programme for 
all existing homes. This will use innovative construction 
techniques, incorporating more use of sustainable 
materials, alongside existing fabric solutions to deliver 
more sustainable buildings with reduced energy 
demand (see Goal 9).
//
The Welsh Government Energy Service provides a 
comprehensive package of support to the public sector 
and communities to take forward projects providing 
local benefit. This includes help, advice and funding 
for early stages of development, through to access to 
capital funding. Wales Funding Programme and the 
Welsh Government Local Energy Fund are accessed 
via the service, and together provide loans, including 
low or interest-free loans, to support installation. 
The service is developing a pipeline of renewable 
energy and energy efficiency projects which are being 
delivered across Wales.
//
The Greenhouse Gas Inventories for England, Scotland, 
Wales and Northern Ireland: 1990 – 2016 estimated 
the 2016 Northern Ireland emissions at 20.6 million 
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2e); with 
20% from energy supply. This indicates a decrease 
of 15.9% in overall greenhouse gas emissions in 
2016 compared to the 1990 base year. The Strategic 
Energy Framework for Northern Ireland 2010 set a 
target of 40% of electricity consumption to be met 
from renewables by 2020. As of December 2018, the 
12-month rolling average was 38%.
//
The UK has been a driving force for collective action 
towards cleaner energy, playing a leading role in 
securing the agreement of 195 countries to sign up to 
the Paris Climate Agreement in 2015 and in delivering 
an operational rulebook to enable its effective 
implementation at the 2018 United Nations Climate 
Change Conference (COP24). The rulebook will 
galvanise genuine climate action, providing a common 
set of rules while allowing flexibility for those countries 
that need it.
//
At the 2017 United Nations Climate Change 
Conference (COP23), the UK, alongside Canada, 
launched the Powering Past Coal Alliance (PPCA), 
a voluntary coalition of national and sub-national 
governments, businesses and organisations. Through 
the PPCA, the UK has brought together stakeholders 
across the globe, united in their desire to phase out 
the most polluting fuel. The UK also hosted the world’s 
first Zero Emission Vehicle Summit in September 
2018, bringing together representatives from over 40 
countries to collaborate on a zero-emission future for 
transport around the world and accelerate investment 
in both zero-emission technology and infrastructure.
//
An important component of the UK’s global effort 
has been supporting developing countries to expand 
their infrastructure and upgrade their technology for 
supplying modern and sustainable energy services (see 
Goal 9).
//
Since 2011, the UK’s International Climate Finance 
(ICF) has helped 17 million people access clean energy 
and installed 590 MW of clean energy capacity.
This is helping to deliver universal access to affordable 
energy and provides support for climate mitigation 
and adaptation. As part of the Paris commitment, 
the UK pledged a further £5.8 billion of International 
Climate Finance (ICF) between 2016 and 2020. Over its 
lifetime, the ICF is expected to give 36 million people 
improved access to clean energy and deliver 5,800 MW 
of installed clean energy capacity.
//
Low carbon technologies are often capital-intensive 
initially but the UK’s ICF is helping lower risk 
perceptions. It focusses on “transformational change” 
through targeted investment in innovative projects with 
the potential to be scaled up and replicated by others, 
and by tackling barriers that hold the private sector 
back from investing.
//
The UK has committed £148 million towards the 
Renewable Energy Performance Platform to mobilise 
private sector development activity and investment in 
small and medium-scale renewable energy projects 
in sub-Saharan Africa. The UK is also supporting the 
development and completion of small-scale on-grid 
renewable energy projects in Uganda by investing 
£50 million in the Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariff 
(GET FiT), leveraging €400 million in public and private 
investment. GET FiT has been so successful that plans 
are underway to see if it can be replicated in other 
neighbouring countries.
//
The UK has made significant progress decarbonising 
the power sector, but further action is needed to build 
on these gains, and to cut emissions from transport 
and heating in order to meet its legally binding 
carbon budgets. Transport is now the UK’s largest 
emitting sector and heat is responsible for around a 
third of UK emissions. These issues will be tackled 
through investment, technological breakthroughs, 
and collaboration between government, industry and 
consumers. In the power sector, the UK will continue 
to invest in low carbon technologies and will publish 
an Energy White Paper in the summer of 2019 to set 
out steps for ensuring the energy system is fit for 
the future.
//
The Annual Energy Statement sets out progress and 
future plans relevant to Goal 7. The decision of the 
Scottish Government to reach net zero greenhouse gas 
emissions by 2045, following expert advice from the 
UK Committee on Climate Change, will further affect 
future plans and policies.
//
The UK must continue to develop new technologies 
and approaches to deliver a clean, low cost and reliable 
energy mix. The UK government is investing over £2.5 
billion between 2015 and 2021 in energy innovation, 
covering technologies including Carbon Capture, 
Usage and Storage, low carbon heating, and hydrogen. 
A strong focus on innovation, including through work 
with international partners, will continue to be a core 
component of the UK’s strategy.
//
In Wales, it is expected that overall power demand 
will increase as a result of growing electrification 
of transport. To ensure future demand can be met, 
significant investment is needed in energy generation, 
transmission and distribution infrastructure.
//
For Northern Ireland, greenhouse gas projections 
indicate that from early 2020s onwards and across 
all sectors, emissions will flatline or increase.258 The 
Committee on Climate Change released a report in 
February 2019 on the options, strategies, measures 
and schemes to reduce its greenhouse emissions in the 
2020s. Northern Ireland is considering how to action 
these recommendations.
//
Already recognised as having made strong progress in 
energy efficient housing, the UK will do even more.259
Through the new Future Homes Standard and the 
Clean Growth Grand Challenge Buildings Mission, 
the UK will create a market for the next generation of 
buildings with low carbon heating and world-leading 
levels of energy efficiency. The Fuel Poverty Strategy will 
also be updated in 2020, setting out how all fuel poor 
homes will be upgraded to an energy efficiency rating 
of Energy Performance Certificate Band C by 2030.
//
In 2017, 25% of households in Scotland were 
estimated to be in fuel poverty. The Scottish 
Parliament is currently considering proposed legislation 
that includes targets related to the eradication of 
fuel poverty.
//
Heating homes is a particular challenge in Wales, given 
the current dependence upon fossil fuels and the older, 
less energy-efficient housing stock. Local authorities 
are taking forward new approaches to decarbonising 
heat, with an aim to build the evidence base on the 
appropriate approaches to overcome the challenges in 
decarbonising the energy system.
//
Homes are only part of the story and new regulations 
on Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting will help 
deliver the UK’s ambition for businesses to improve 
their energy productivity by 20% by 2030.
//
The UK will continue to work closely with its EU 
partners to ensure continued cooperation in areas of 
mutual benefit, including security of energy supply and 
tackling climate change. Given geographic proximity, 
the UK and EU have a mutual interest in agreeing 
broad energy cooperation, including arrangements for 
trade in electricity and gas, cooperation with agencies 
and bodies, and data-sharing to facilitate market 
operations. Broad cooperation can lead to reduced 
emissions, lower energy bills, and increased security 
of supply, and will accelerate the transition to a low 
carbon economy and help to deliver both the UK’s and 
the EU’s energy and climate objectives.
//
The UK economy has grown every year since 2010.269
Since then, an average growth rate of 1.2% in 
gross domestic product (GDP) per capita has been 
maintained, close to the G7 average of 1.4%.
There has been strong economic growth and high 
levels of employment in recent years, with an annual 
growth rate of real GDP per employed person at 
0.739% in 2017 (up from 0.516% in 2016, and 
0.615% in 2015). GDP growth is forecast to be 
1.2% in 2019 and increase to 1.4% in 2020.
//
Small- and medium-sized businesses are vital to 
economic growth and employment in the UK, 
and, measures to support businesses and promote 
small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have 
allowed firms to invest and grow. SMEs employed 
660,000 more people in 2018 than 2015, representing 
57% of the increase in private sector employment. 
Total employment in SMEs was 16.3 million at the 
start of 2018, accounting for 60% of all private sector 
employment in the UK.
//
To make the most of everyone’s talents and maximise 
economic growth it is important that everyone has 
the same opportunities to start and grow businesses. 
To help promote further employment opportunities, 
the UK is creating shared growth by backing small 
businesses. Between 2012 and 2018, the British 
Business Bank’s Start-Up Loans Programme lent over 
£464 million to more than 60,000 entrepreneurs. 44% 
of Start-Up Loans recipients to date have been aged 
under 30; 41% were previously unemployed; 39% of 
loan recipients are women; and 22% of loans were 
issued to entrepreneurs from a Black or Minority Ethnic 
background.
//
Reform of financial services has also been a top priority 
following the 2008 financial crisis. Important steps have 
been taken to put an end to poor lending practice and, 
to strengthening protection for consumers. Moreover, 
the UK is improving access to retail banking for 
unbanked consumers which aim to promote financial 
inclusion, including for those with limited experience 
of banking and those that may be in financial difficulty. 
The nine largest personal current account providers 
in the UK are required to offer basic bank accounts, 
and as of June 2018, there were 7.5 million basic 
bank accounts open in the UK. Research from the 
University of Birmingham shows that the number of 
unbanked people in the UK reached an all-time low 
in 2017 at 1.23 million, down from 1.52 million in 
2015-16.
//
The UK is committed to working with employers 
and stakeholders to promote high quality work and 
ensure that workers have meaningful and fulfilling 
occupations. One focus has been working with 
industry and trade unions to promote good work in 
the economy and give workers the skills they need to 
succeed.
//
The Apprenticeship Levy is strengthening the role of 
apprenticeships in the workforce, helping millions 
of people get onto the career ladder and develop 
their skills. In England, over £2.5 billion a year will be 
available for investment in apprenticeships by 2020.
//
Young people’s economic participation is crucial, and 
the UK’s education policy helps promote social mobility 
among young people to facilitate this (see Goal 4). 
From October to December 2018, 11.3% of 16 to 
24-year-olds were not in education, employment, 
or training in the UK, a decrease of 0.5 percentage 
points from Quarter 4 of 2015 (8.6.1). Traineeships 
support social mobility by providing high-quality work 
placements with employers, and work preparation 
training, for young people who need to develop their 
skills and experience to enter the labour market. In 
England, there were 17,000 apprenticeship starts from 
the 63,800 traineeship starts in 2014/15, 2015/16 and 
2016/17,280 and the UK introduced a National Living 
Wage (NLW) for over-25s in 2016. It is calculated that 
full-time workers receiving NLW will be more than 
£2,750 better off a year compared to 2015.
//
The UK is committed to ending modern slavery in the 
UK, and to ensuring a response that keeps pace with 
the evolving threat it presents. The pioneering Modern 
Slavery Act 2015, gives law enforcement agencies the 
tools to tackle modern slavery, including maximum life 
sentences for perpetrators. The UK also commissioned 
an independent review of the Act, which concluded in 
spring 2019.
//
The UK is transforming the law enforcement response, 
seeing more police operations than ever before; 
overhauling support for victims; and working with 
businesses to eradicate forced labour from UK supply 
chains. As a result, more victims than ever before are 
being identified. In 2018, 6,993 potential victims were 
identified in the UK – a 36% increase on 2017 (see 
Goal 16).
//
To achieve Goal 8 effectively, it is important to limit the 
impact of economic growth on the environment.
The UK has delivered this through important progress 
to decouple growth from carbon emission and has 
reduced emissions faster than any other G7 nation 
contributing to climate mitigation (Goal 13). From 
2022, a tax on the manufacture and import of plastic 
packaging will be introduced to encourage greater 
use of recycled plastic and help reduce plastic waste. 
Subject to consultation, this tax will apply to plastic 
packaging which does not contain at least 30% 
recycled plastic. This will improve resource efficiency 
by providing a clear economic incentive for businesses 
to use more recycled material, also contributing to 
sustainable production (Goal 12), and life on land 
(Goal 15).
//
The UK continues to show international leadership 
to tackle climate change with its focus on energy 
efficiency and pursuing decarbonisation through the 
switch to cleaner technologies. Between 1990 and 
2017, the UK reduced its greenhouse gas emissions by 
42% while growing the economy by 72%. This 
means that, for every unit of GDP output, the UK has 
reduced emissions by two-thirds. The UK’s support for 
renewable generation through mechanisms such as 
Contracts for Difference has helped to boost the role 
of renewables in its energy mix.
//
Overall, energy consumption in the UK is on a long-term downward trend - between 2007 and 2016 
energy consumed across the economy has decreased 
by 15%. The use of coal in the UK’s electricity mix 
has dropped from 40% in 2012 to just 5% in 2018 – 
more than an 80% decrease over just 6 years. In May 
2019, the UK reached a week without using coal for 
the first time since the industrial revolution.
//
In addition, sustainability is being considered as part of 
the proposed Tourism Sector Deal, including in terms 
of reducing the negative impacts of seasonality and 
focussing on clean growth (see Goal 12).
The UK will continue to focus on these areas to 
improve institutional capacity on climate change 
mitigation and strengthen resilience and adaptive 
capacity to climate-related hazards.
//
Scotland’s National Performance Framework sets out 
a clear purpose for opportunities for all of Scotland to 
flourish through increased well-being, and sustainable, 
inclusive economic growth. Inclusive growth has much 
in common with this Goal and underpins Scotland’s 
Economic Strategy.
//
Scotland’s Chief Economic Adviser published its tri-annual State of the Economy report which summarises 
and analyses the performance of and outlook for the 
economy. In 2018, Scotland’s GDP grew by 1.3% 
compared to 2017, and the economy continued to 
expand in Quarter 4 2018 growing by 0.3% over 
the quarter. Over the past year, growth was broad 
based across the service and construction sectors. In 
2018, the manufacturing sector’s output increased 
by 3.2% in total. This included strong increases in 
the manufacturing of computer, electrical and optical 
products. This is likely to contribute towards increasing 
productivity through diversification, technological 
upgrading and innovation.
//
Using recent OECD data, Scotland’s overall productivity 
(in terms of GDP per hour worked) ranked Scotland 16 
out of 37 key OECD trading partners.289 This position 
has remained unchanged since 2007.
//
In 2018, Scotland’s Centre for Regional Inclusive 
Growth (SCRIG) was launched and the Economic 
Action Plan was launched to facilitate the delivery of 
inclusive growth across Scotland.
//
SCRIG will deepen the evidence base on what works 
in regional inclusive growth and promote best practice 
policy and decision-making through Regional Economic 
Partnerships and working with stakeholders. SCRIG 
hosts an interactive dashboard which contains regional 
economic data for Scotland to allow users to conduct 
an inclusive growth diagnostic for their local area. 
The inclusive growth diagnostic is a six-stage 
framework that identifies the constraints to inclusive 
growth and prioritises actions to address these. 
The approach has been successfully piloted in local 
authorities in Scotland, including North Ayrshire 
Council who used the work to inform the development 
of their ‘Fair for All’ Strategy to reduce inequalities in 
North Ayrshire, and is being used to inform City Region 
and Growth Deals across Scotland.
//
As part of actions to make it easier for small- and 
medium-sized businesses to access finance so that 
they can use it to support jobs and achieve growth the 
Scottish Growth Scheme offers investment guarantees 
and loans to new and early-stage companies with 
high-growth potential, particularly those in technology-intensive sectors and emerging markets such as 
financial technology.
//
Businesses in Scotland often find it difficult to borrow 
money over a longer term (10 to 15 years), known as 
patient finance. This will be a key focus for the Scottish 
National Investment Bank. The Bank will support 
ambitious companies and important infrastructure 
projects. By aligning its aims and objectives with 
Scotland’s Economic Strategy, the Bank has the 
potential to transform and grow Scotland’s economy.
//
The Bank will be operational in 2020, investing in 
businesses and communities across Scotland. The 
Scottish Government has committed to investing £2 
billion over 10 years to capitalise the Scottish National 
Investment Bank, making it a cornerstone of Scotland’s 
economy.
//
The Scotland CAN DO: Business Innovation Forum 
supports the improvement of Scotland’s business 
innovation performance by providing scrutiny and 
challenge of progress against the Innovation Action 
Plan and actions arising from the innovation chapter of 
the Enterprise and Skills Review and considering and 
providing advice on the potential impacts of emerging 
and longer term trends and issues on business 
innovation.
//
Scotland’s labour market is performing well for many 
people. Unemployment in Jan-Mar 2019 fell to 3.2%, 
its lowest rate on record. Scotland’s employment rate 
for 16 to 64-year-olds at 75.4% in January-March 2019 
is higher than 10 years earlier (73.1%). Scotland has 
just under 1,500 living-wage accredited employers.
However, there is more to do to ensure no one is left 
behind. To support this Scotland has set a target of an 
additional 25,000 workers to be paid the real Living 
Wage, or more, through employer accreditation by 
2021. There are also strong links to actions under Goal 
5 and Goal 10.
//
Scotland is committed to becoming a Fair Work Nation 
by 2025 and working to remove barriers to economic 
inclusion through Scotland’s Fair Work Action Plan.
Included in the Fair Work Action plan is the creation 
of a new online support tool, where small and micro 
employers can access support and guidance on Fair 
Work from a central point. In addition, there will 
be an expansion to the Work Place Equality Fund, 
enabling businesses to implement innovative ideas to 
embed Fair Work. Fair Start Scotland provides tailored, 
person-centred support to assist people in their journey 
towards and into work.
//
This work also includes targeted efforts to halve 
the disability employment gap as set out in A Fairer 
Scotland for Disabled People: employment action 
plan and addressing the gender pay gap. Other 
actions being taken within the powers of the Scottish 
Parliament include support for trade unions, refreshing 
the Scottish Business Pledge, developing the Young 
Workforce Programme, and ensuring that those 
bidding for public sector contracts do not use zero 
hours contracts.
//
To help minimise the impact for people and businesses 
facing redundancy, the Partnership for Action for 
Continuing Employment (PACE) is a national strategic 
partnership framework responding to redundancy 
situations.
//
In October 2018 practical guidance was launched to 
help businesses identify and prevent human trafficking 
and exploitation across their operations. The guidance 
recommends that checks should be undertaken by all 
types of businesses to ensure workers have access to 
identification documents, are not being held in debt 
bondage and are not being coerced. The guidance 
also states that employees should be given training to 
spot signs of exploitation and encouraged to report 
concerns to Police Scotland or the UK-wide Modern 
Slavery Helpline.
//
Wales’s Economic Action Plan draws on levers to grow 
the economy, spread opportunity, reduce inequality and 
promote well-being. The Plan is focussed on a common 
purpose to work with business and others to grow the 
economy inclusively and spread opportunity. It includes: 
• Promoting, encouraging, and delivering responsible 
practices through the Economic Contract.
• Delivering public investment with a social purpose 
by channelling financial support to those businesses 
who share the same values and are investing for the 
future through the Government’s Calls to Action.
//
The Economic Contract is the centrepiece of Wales’s 
Economic Action Plan and frames the reciprocal 
relationship between government and business to drive 
public investment with a social purpose. It requires 
businesses seeking investment to demonstrate a 
commitment to inclusive growth, fair work, a focus 
on health, skills and learning in the workplace and 
decarbonisation. The Plan has four distinct themes; 
providing an individualised approach to employment 
support, underlining the responsibility of employers to 
support staff, closing skills gaps and preparing for a 
radically changing labour market.
//
The foundational economy, which on some estimates 
accounts for around 40% of jobs in Wales, describes 
the organisations SMEs, microbusinesses and social 
enterprises that are rooted in local communities and 
deliver the goods and services people need, from 
construction and childcare, through to social care and 
retail.
//
The Wales Employability Plan sets out ambitions to 
support people across Wales into work and to prepare 
the workforce for immediate and long-term challenges 
of the future. The support is accessible to all, including 
those with protected characteristics and young people 
at risk of disengaging from education, employment 
and training.
//
Wales’s Apprenticeship programme raises the profile 
of ‘on the job’ training and is on track to create 
100,000 apprenticeship employment opportunities 
by 2021, ensuring a focus on growth sectors to boost 
productivity levels in science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics (STEm) and technical sectors.
//
The Flexible Skills Programme provides direct 
intervention where an employer’s growth is being 
constrained by a skills gap. From April 2018 to March 
2019, the programme supported 61 employers, 
assisting them in achieving their workforce 
development needs. This is believed to have improved 
skills levels of 4,000 employees.
//
Ensuring fair work for all is a key focus of Wales’s 
efforts to deliver Goal 8. In Wales, the ‘Ethical 
Employment in Supply Chains – Code of Practice’ sets 
out 12 principles to drive actions on issues such as 
supply chain transparency, the National Living Wage
and eradication of modern slavery. In its first two years 
173 organisations signed up to the Code.
//
To address modern slavery, the Wales Anti-Slavery 
Leadership Group provides strategic leadership for 
tackling modern slavery in Wales and to provide the 
best possible support for survivors, adding value by 
coordinating collaboration across devolved and non-devolved partners and third sector organisations, to 
maximise opportunities for multi-agency solutions 
to tackle modern slavery. The Anti-Slavery Training 
Programme delivers a wide range of courses across 
Wales. The training is approved by Wales’s National 
Training Framework and in 2018 in Wales over 10,000 
people were trained. Raising awareness of modern 
slavery is leading to an increase in the number of 
reported cases. The numbers of people referred onto 
the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) has increased 
year on year from 34 referrals in 2012 to 251 in 
2018.
//
Procurement acts as a springboard to inclusive and 
sustained growth. The Community Benefits policy 
innovatively uses public procurement to create jobs 
and provides training for people facing disadvantage. 
It encourages community engagement as a contract 
requirement to support community initiatives 
particularly in deprived communities. By April 2019, 
536 public procurements had included Community 
Benefits requirements that have created 2,477 
employment opportunities, 1,132 apprenticeships 
and 103,743 training weeks for Community Benefit 
recruits.
//
Wales’s Childcare Offer provides 30 hours of early 
education and childcare, to working parents of three 
and four-year-olds for 48 weeks of the year, with 
parents reporting increased flexibility in the types of 
jobs they do, the hours they work, and their disposable 
income.
//
Northern Ireland is committed to building a thriving, 
competitive economy based on having more companies 
with an international outlook, recording high growth, 
greater levels of innovation and entrepreneurship, and 
backed by locally-based, world-class research. This 
will help to provide better prospects for employment 
and economic growth. Key outcomes for Northern 
Ireland are prosperity through a strong, competitive, 
and regionally-balanced economy and the education 
of young people as contributors to society and to the 
economy and environment.
//
Progress towards Goal 8 is being made: the 
employment rate has steadily increased from 67.0% 
in 2012, to 69.4% in 2016. This dropped slightly to 
69.0% in 2017 before rising to 70.0% in 2018. The 
underemployment rate is 14.6%, having reduced from 
39,000 people in 2015 working part-time who would 
like to work more hours to 30,000 people in 2017.
In 2016/17, 75.5% of students leaving Northern Irish 
Higher Education institutions were in professional 
or managerial occupations or in further study six 
months after graduating. In addition; tourism 
continues to support economic growth: total spend 
by external visitors during overnight trips in Northern 
Ireland increased significantly from £463 million in 
2011 to £657 million in 2017. Culture and art also 
contribute to economic growth, according to findings 
from latest Continuous Household Survey, 87% of 
adults engaged in culture and arts in 2017/18. This was 
a 2 percentage point increase on the engagement rate 
in 2016/17.
//
However, challenges such as innovation and promoting 
productive employment for all remain. In January 
– March 2019, the average seasonally adjusted 
employment rate for Northern Ireland was 71.3%,well 
below the rate of 76.1% for the UK as a whole.
The highest employment rate (16-64) for a Local 
Government District (LGD) was recorded in Lisburn 
and Castlereagh (81.5%) and was 18.5 percentage 
points above the lowest rate, which was recorded in 
Causeway Coast and Glens (63.0%).
//
Innovation is a key priority to support Northern Ireland’s 
economic growth. The latest findings from the UK 
Innovation Survey show that innovation has decreased 
in most regions and countries. From 2014-16, Northern 
Ireland had the lowest share of innovation active 
businesses (39%), a fall from 45% in the 2012-14 
period, and below the UK as a whole (49% innovation 
active firms). Concrete steps are being taken to 
address this gap and support delivery of Goal 8.
//
Through Invest Northern Ireland (Invest NI), 327 
companies have been helped to engage in innovation 
activities for the first time. An investment of £52 
million has been secured by SMEs as a result of Invest 
NI’s Access to Finance funds and thirteen new high 
potential start-ups have been supported alongside six 
companies through scaling activity. In 2018/19, 406 
projects had been delivered by the further education 
sector through the InnovateUs programme, resulting 
in over 300 small businesses engaging in innovation 
activities to develop new products, processes or 
services.
//
A new Entrepreneurship Ambassador has been 
appointed, chairing a new Entrepreneurship Forum 
for Northern Ireland with the aim of supporting 
businesses, promoting collaboration and encouraging 
an entrepreneurial culture in Northern Ireland. 196 
companies have entered a new market to exploit trade 
opportunities and 97 companies have been supported 
in selling outside Northern Ireland for the first time.
//
The UK’s international Economic Development Strategy
focusses on creating jobs, catalysing investment, and 
harnessing the power of trade to support prosperous 
economies that bring people out of poverty. These 
efforts also impact the UK’s work to reduce poverty 
(Goal 1) and inequalities (Goal 10). 
//
CDC Group, the UK’s development finance institution, 
invests in countries where the private sector is weak, jobs 
are scarce, and the investment climate is difficult, with 
a focus on sectors where growth leads to jobs. In 2017, 
companies backed by CDC supported three-quarters of 
a million direct jobs; paid US$3.5 billion in taxes to their 
local governments and provided vital financial services to 
47 million people in poor countries.
//
Economic empowerment is one of the focus areas 
of the UK’s Disability Inclusive Development Strategy
(2018-2023), and recognises the transformative power 
of ensuring people with disabilities gain improved 
access to employment opportunities. Also, in line with 
the promise to Leave No One Behind, the new disability 
window of the UK Aid Connect Programme will 
create innovative solutions to the economic inclusion 
of people with disabilities in four countries. For 
example, the programme will be implemented in urban 
locations in Kenya and Bangladesh and will directly 
reach 10,000 people with a disability.
//
Increasing trade is key to supporting developing 
countries particularly least developed countries (LDCs) in 
achieving economic growth, in line with Goal 8. In 2017, 
the UK spent around £1.5 billion on Aid for Trade (AfT), 
this is broadly unchanged from 2015.
//
The AfT programme supports critical trade infrastructure 
like ports and roads, strengthens sectors so that they 
can be more competitive in export markets, helps 
reduce trade costs, and builds the skills and capacity to 
negotiate and implement trade agreements.
//
For example, the UK is providing financial and 
technical support to build trade capacity in 51 of the 
world’s poorest countries through the World Trade 
Organization’s Enhanced Integrated Framework 
(EIF). The EIF has helped LDCs increase agricultural 
productivity for both local consumption and for export. 
Approximately 60% of the EIF’s support for productive 
capacity-building goes to sustainable agriculture and 
agro-business projects, including fisheries and animal 
husbandry.
//
Decent jobs are vital to the eradication of poverty. 
For many people, they are the main source of income 
and thus determine the type of lives they live and 
opportunities that they have.
//
The UK’s work on decent jobs focusses on working in 
some of the most challenging environments to help the 
poorest and most marginalised to gain jobs, increase 
their incomes and work their way out of poverty. 
Between 2015/16 and 2017/18, the UK enabled 3 
million people to raise their incomes or maintain/gain a 
better job or livelihood. For example, the PrOpCom 
Mai-karfi programme has helped over 850,000 
beneficiaries increase their income by a total of over 
£48 million in some of the poorest parts of northern 
Nigeria.
//
Modern slavery undermines efforts to achieve decent 
work and other Goals including gender equality (Goal 
5) and peaceful, just and inclusive societies (Goal 16).
//
The Global Estimates on Modern Slavery suggest that 
over 40 million people were victims of slavery on any 
given day in 2016, across all regions of the world. 
Women and girls accounted for 71% of modern 
slavery victims. One in four victims of modern slavery 
were children. Although 2016 estimates show the 
number of children in child labour declined by 94 
million since 2000, the rate of reduction slowed by 
two-thirds since 2012.
//
At the UN General Assembly (UNGA) 2017, the Prime 
Minister launched the Call to Action to End Forced 
Labour, Modern Slavery and Human Trafficking. It now 
has endorsements from 88 UN Member States.
//
The UK’s efforts to eradicate modern slavery worldwide 
includes working through the multilateral system to 
raise political will, increase the evidence base and 
increase the scale of global resourcing to address the 
issue. These efforts are supported by a £200 million UK 
aid commitment to tackle the root causes of slavery 
– improving business and recruitment practice to 
eradicate exploitation in supply chains, strengthen law 
enforcement capacity and improve victim protection. 
New programmes include up to a £20 million 
contribution to the Global Fund to End Modern Slavery, 
an innovative public-private partnership which seeks to 
develop focussed, coherent strategies across countries 
and industries to reduce the prevalence of modern 
slavery.
//
Moreover, the UK’s Work in Freedom Programme 
focusses on preventing trafficking and forced labour of 
women migrant workers from South Asia. In 2018, up 
to £48 million was announced to tackle child labour 
in South Asia and conflict affected and fragile parts of 
Africa. This includes £10 million to protect more than 
400,000 boys and girls at risk of slavery in the Horn of 
Africa and along migratory routes in Somalia, Sudan 
and Ethiopia.
//
Higher productivity remains the only path to 
sustainable growth, higher wages, and rising living 
standards. However, the slowdown in the UK has been 
more pronounced, falling from its pre-crisis average of 
2.2% between 1960 and 2007, to a post-crisis average 
of 0.2% since 2007.314 Significant steps are being 
taken to improve productivity, including delivering over 
half a trillion pounds in capital investments since 2010. 
The 2018 Autumn Budget announced an increase in 
the National Productivity Investment Fund from £31 
billion to £37 billion, supporting investments in key 
infrastructure, research and development (R&D), and 
housing supply.
//
The UK wants to work with employers to give every 
worker the opportunity to upskill or retrain for the new 
economy. In England, £100 million has been pledged 
for the first phase of the National Retraining Scheme, 
announced in the last Budget, which will be rolled out 
this year.
//
Following the Taylor Review into promoting Good 
Work in the UK, the UK’s Good Work Plan was 
published, outlining steps to increase employer 
transparency, protect agency workers, and strengthen 
the enforcement of employment rights.
//
Wales faces a particular challenge in performing 
strongly on productivity, as research shows that, when 
other things are equal, productivity tends to be higher 
in, and near, big cities. Wales has a relatively small 
share of its population living in, or close to, big cities.
//
In 2019 Wales’s independent Fair Work Commission 
reviewed a range of legislative, economic and other 
levers to drive forward work to help make Wales a 
more equal, fair and just society. The Commission 
issued a report in May that the Welsh Government is 
considering as part of the commitment to creating a 
better working future for everyone in Wales. 
The Welsh Government has established a new £3 
million fund that will test new ways of nurturing and 
growing the everyday parts of Wales’s economy.
//
Supporting the adoption of innovative new 
technologies will be key to delivering continued 
growth. The UK is already one of the best places in 
the world to start and grow a tech business. In 2018, 
the UK came 4th out of 126 countries on the Global 
Innovation Index (GII), which ranks global economies’ 
innovation readiness.315 Further strengthening this will 
require investment from government and industry to 
remain at the cutting edge. The UK’s ambition is to 
raise total R&D investment to 2.4% of GDP by 2027, 
and 3% in the longer term – placing the UK in the 
top quartile of OECD countries. As a first step towards 
this target, an additional investment of £7 billion for 
R&D over five years has been announced316 as part of 
the National Productivity Investment Fund. This is the 
largest increase in 40 years.
//
The UK is building global links to enhance opportunities 
from international trade. The UK’s Export Strategy
aims to raise UK exports as a percentage of GDP from 
30% to 35%. The offer to business is based on the 
four ways the UK can make a difference in partnership 
with providers of export in public and private sectors: 
encourage, inform, connect and finance.
//
The UK’s Industrial Strategy aims to boost productivity 
by backing businesses to create good jobs and increase 
the earning power of people throughout the UK with 
investment in skills, industries, and infrastructure (See 
Goal 9).
//
In Northern Ireland, there is a longstanding economic 
inactivity issue and ensuring regional balance of 
economic prosperity in Northern Ireland currently 
shows considerable variation between local 
government geographic areas, when measuring 
against employment rate and economic inactivity. 
Addressing this is a key challenge with a suite of issues 
contributing to the overall rate including employability, 
childcare, caring responsibilities and transport 
infrastructure. In delivering economic growth that 
works for everyone, ensuring those who are furthest 
away from the workplace are supported is vital. In 
Scotland, retaining a clear focus on the Leave No One 
Behind agenda as the economy continues to develop 
with technological advances is both a challenge and 
opportunity.
//
The UK will deliver new ways to target support for 
those Foreign Direct Investment projects that create 
the most value for investors and national wealth, 
focussing on maximising wealth creation for the whole 
of the UK. The objective is to have the greatest positive 
impact on the success of businesses, the creation of 
jobs, and the regeneration of communities, using a 
three-part approach: make use of data in new ways 
to measure economic impact of projects, identify 
opportunities across the UK with the greatest potential 
for international investment; and target government 
support precisely where it will make the biggest 
difference for the economy.
//
The UK’s Industrial Strategy, shaped by over 2,000 
organisations across the UK, reinforces the themes of 
the Goals, in particular those captured in Goal 9. It sets 
out to put the UK at the forefront of industries of the 
future, improving productivity and people’s lives, by 
tackling four Grand Challenges: artificial intelligence 
and data; meeting the needs of an ageing society; 
clean growth; and future of mobility.
//
Supporting improved infrastructure service provision is 
central to the UK’s economic and human development 
objectives. The UK’s work in this area spans a range 
of sectors, including energy, transport, water and 
sanitation, information communications technology, 
housing and urban infrastructure. Improving equality 
and leaving no-one behind are integrated across 
the UK’s approach to infrastructure investment. The 
UK’s National Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2016-2021 
identifies the need to change the make-up of the 
infrastructure industries through the development of 
skills and apprenticeships to improve diversity and a 
focus on investment across UK regions.
//
The UK’s current and future infrastructure needs are 
being addressed through a number of programmes 
aligned with the UK’s Industrial Strategy. These include: 
the Transport Investment Strategy, which sets out the 
UK’s approach to maintaining and upgrading transport 
infrastructure to connect communities and businesses 
across the UK; the Future Telecoms Infrastructure 
Review, which sets out the UK’s commitment to 
enhance digital connectivity throughout the country; 
and the UK government’s Inclusive Transport Strategy.
//
Over 99% of the UK’s population live within 2km of 
an all-season road. UK air freight and passenger 
volumes have also continued to increase, with air 
carriers reporting 284 million passengers and 2.6 
million tons of air freight in 2017, an increase of 13% 
and 15% respectively, from 2015.
//
Over 99% of the UK population are covered by a 
mobile network. However, there remain areas where 
mobile connectivity must be improved, and the UK has 
committed to extend geographic coverage to 95% by 
2022.
//
A total of £200 million has been allocated through 
the Rural Gigabit Connectivity programme to fund 
full-fibre broadband connections in hard-to-reach 
areas across the UK, starting with all primary schools 
that would otherwise not be able to access to high-quality broadband. This will enable the testing of new 
approaches to fibre roll-out in rural areas, which will 
benefit tens of thousands of homes and businesses 
across the UK, with the Borderlands, Cornwall, and 
Welsh Valleys among the first areas to be targeted.
//
Between 2015 and 2018, Gross Fixed Capital 
Formation in the UK was estimated to have grown by 
6% and business investment was estimated to have 
grown by 1%.
//
The UK is committed to being the best place to start 
and grow a business. It is consistently rated as one of 
the top ten countries in the world for the ease of doing 
business, with over 1,000 businesses starting every 
day in the UK between 2015 and 2017. Through 
a range of funds administered by the British Business 
Bank, the UK has increased access to finance for small-and medium- sized businesses, currently supporting 
over 82,000 smaller UK businesses (see Goal 8).
//
Improvements to the inclusivity of industry in terms 
of place, pay and productivity have included a wide 
range of measures. To tackle the unfair spread of the 
UK’s prosperity, a Stronger Towns Fund, valued at £1.6 
billion from 2019 to 2026, was launched in 2019 to 
create jobs, train local people and boost economic 
activity – with communities having a say on how the 
money is spent.
//
Through the Sector Deals programme, a long-term 
partnership between government and industry, the 
UK is driving improvements in diversity and inclusion. 
The Deals have secured a commitment that women 
will account for 40% of all those employed in the 
nuclear sector by 2030, up from 22% in 2016; the 
Aerospace Sector Deal saw the creation of the Women 
in Aviation and Aerospace Charter; and the Offshore 
Wind Sector Deal commits to doubling the proportion 
of women in the workforce to at least a third by 2029, 
and to establish a new target for black and minority 
ethnic representation in the sector by the end of 2019. 
(See Goal 10).
//
Through the Future of Mobility Grand Challenge, the 
UK is working to create a safer and cleaner transport 
system that’s better able to meet the needs of all users. 
Cleaning up road transport is vital to improving air 
quality, making UK towns and cities better places to live 
and work.
//
The UK’s leading energy efficiency measures and 
investment in renewable technologies have contributed 
to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. 52.8% of 
electricity was generated from clean sources in 2018 – 
up from 23.1% in 2010 and 45.4% in 2015.
Through the Clean Growth Grand Challenge, the UK is 
working to make sure that benefits of clean growth are 
felt by communities across the four nations, including a 
mission to at least halve energy use of all new buildings 
by 2030 (see Goal 7).
//
The UK is investing £170 million on innovation in 
construction to support the transition to low carbon, 
working with communities across the UK to set 
decarbonisation strategies and maximise the clean 
growth benefits in terms of new jobs and business 
opportunities.
//
In 2016 there were 4,430 researchers per million 
inhabitants in the UK – representing a 12.4% increase 
since 2011. Gross research and development (R&D) 
expenditure in the UK reached £34.8 billion in 2017. 
This was an increase of 4.8% on 2016 (£33.2 billion), 
which is higher than the long-term annual average 
increase since 1990 (4.1%). Total R&D spend in 
the UK in 2017 represented 1.69% of GDP, up from 
1.65% in 2015.
//
Established in 2018, UK Research and Innovation, the 
UK’s major research funding body, brings together 
the seven Research Councils, the innovation agency 
InnovateUK and Research England to create the best 
possible environment for research and innovation to 
flourish in the UK.
//
To enhance the UK’s scientific research and foster 
innovation, an additional £7 billion in R&D investment 
has been committed in the period to 2021/22, as well as 
a commitment to raise spend to 2.4% of GDP by 2027.
//
The UK is committed to improving access to education 
and training, to challenge barriers and reach those at 
risk of being marginalised. The Higher Education and 
Research Act (2017) introduced measures to support 
more students from all backgrounds to participate in 
higher education. This includes requiring universities 
to publish student participation and progression data 
broken down by gender, ethnicity and socio-economic 
background.
//
Scotland has invested significantly in its infrastructure, 
including schools, colleges, healthcare, transport, 
digital, energy, water and homes. For example, access 
to superfast broadband in Scotland has increased 
year on year, in both urban and rural areas. In 2018, 
over 93% of homes and businesses in Scotland had 
superfast broadband coverage. This is a 58% increase 
since 2014 (59%). Scotland is committed to ensuring 
100% of homes and businesses in Scotland have 
access to superfast broadband.
//
The Scottish Government has set an infrastructure 
investment mission to steadily increase annual 
infrastructure investment, so it is £1.5 billion per year 
higher in 2025/26 than in 2019/20. 
//
An Infrastructure Commission for Scotland has been 
established to provide independent, informed advice 
on the nation’s vision, ambition and priorities to create 
a 30-year infrastructure strategy to meet the Scotland’s 
future economic growth and societal needs.
//
There are close linkages to actions relevant to 
Goals 7 and 8. In 2016, Scotland launched ‘A 
Manufacturing Future in Scotland’ – an action plan 
to deliver concrete initiatives to boost productivity 
across the manufacturing sector. The strategy outlines 
government support to manufacturing SMEs to 
help them keep pace with technology and process 
developments by working in partnership with industry. 
The National Manufacturing Institute for Scotland is 
helping manufacturing businesses in Scotland become 
world leaders in innovation.
//
The Construction Scotland Strategy is working to make 
the industry more sustainable, productive, innovative 
and profitable.
//
Zero Waste Scotland activities, including providing free 
food waste audits and improvement services for small 
businesses, are set to drive progress against the Scottish 
Government’s target to cut food waste by one-third 
by 2025.
//
Scotland has a high level of research excellence 
combined with an extensive network of knowledge 
exchange and innovation activities. Much scientific 
research in Scotland is funded through European 
research initiatives, such as the Horizon 2020 
programme. Targets are in place to double investment 
in business research and development (BERD) between 
2015 and 2025. Actions in place include:
• increasing spending on business R&D grants by £15 
million from 2018-2019 to 2020-2021. 
• providing financial support for local solutions and 
small-scale research and development. 
• continuing to develop a range of policies to 
encourage business innovation investment. 
• encouraging universities and colleges to increase 
the effectiveness of their contribution to business 
innovation. 
• maximising the impact of infrastructure investment 
and procurement on business research and 
development in areas such as electric vehicles, digital 
and mobile technologies. 
//
Infrastructure investment is one of the highest priorities 
for Wales. The Wales Infrastructure Plan for Growth 
and Jobs prioritises and coordinates the delivery of 
major infrastructure investments that will make a 
significant contribution to the long-term economic, 
social and environmental well-being of people and 
communities in Wales.
//
The Welsh Government has invested £9 billion of 
capital funding to improve and develop infrastructure 
across Wales using a series of innovative financing 
initiatives. Investments to date have helped open areas 
of Wales to business and have given communities 
better access to public services.
//
Transport is a fundamental part of this. Delivery of the 
South Wales Metro is underway which will transform 
how people travel around the region by providing 
faster, more frequent and joined-up services. From 
2022 onwards, electrification will see bi-mode and 
tri-mode trains introduced on the Core Valleys Lines 
where they will operate entirely from overhead electric 
power supplemented by batteries. These electric trains 
will be far more efficient than the diesel trains they will 
replace; the electrification will be powered by 100% 
renewable energy, with at least 50% sourced in Wales, 
meaning services on the Core Valleys Lines will be 
entirely emission-free.
//
The Superfast Cymru broadband project (2012-2018) 
fundamentally transformed the digital landscape 
in Wales. Since 2013, the availability of superfast 
broadband across Wales has doubled. The project has 
provided access to over 733,000 premises across Wales 
that would not have been reached through market-led 
commercial deployment.
//
The Development Bank of Wales was set up to 
support the economy of Wales by making it easier for 
businesses - particularly small and medium enterprises 
- to get the finance needed to start up, strengthen and 
grow. It brings together a range of public and private 
funds of more than £1 billion, to invest in Wales’s long-term future.
//
Wales’s Mutual Investment Model was launched to 
promote the public interest – including well-being and 
value for money. Private partners are required to adopt 
the Code of Practice Ethical Employment in Supply 
Chains and establish high levels of environmental 
sustainability, helping deliver Wales’s well-being goals.
//
In 2013, Wales had 0.14% of the world’s researchers 
yet produced 0.3% of the world’s published articles, 
citations of research articles produced in Wales make 
up 0.49% of the global total, and 0.7% of the top 1% 
most highly cited papers. This evidences the efficiency 
of Welsh research, its impact and the world-leading 
nature of a significant proportion of outputs.
//
In Wales, the Sêr Cymru programme supports over 160 
high quality researchers with £100 million in funding. 
It works with leading scholars in Welsh universities, 
increasing the success of Welsh research and the 
technological, medical and environmental capabilities 
of the nation. Through attracting world-leading 
researchers to tackle some of the world’s most pressing 
challenges, Wales also ensures that this programme 
is inclusive, ensuring that a minimum of 40% of its 
Sêr Cymru researchers are female, and requiring all 
researchers to undertake unconscious bias training.
//
Economic well-being and social cohesion rely on 
advances in transport, water, telecommunications 
and housing infrastructure as key enablers to achieve 
the objective of connecting people and opportunities 
through Northern Ireland’s infrastructure. Northern 
Ireland’s key priorities in this area are to improve 
journey times on key economic corridors; increase the 
usage of public transport and active travel; extend 
superfast broadband availability; enhance the uptake 
of public services through electronic means; enhance 
provision of water and wastewater services and 
improve access to suitable housing. While the various 
elements addressed are quite distinct in terms of the 
services they offer and the benefits they bring, the 
key linkage is in terms of how they collectively help 
to shape the potential of the region and of individual 
places within the region.
//
Enhancing the flow of people and goods on major 
inter-urban routes will be a key enabler of economic 
growth and a significant programme of investment. 
In the urban areas, Belfast Rapid Transit and new 
multi-modal transport hubs for Belfast and Derry/ 
Londonderry will incentivise the use of public transport. 
In the longer term, local Transport Plans integrated 
with the Council’s land-use Development Plans should 
reduce the need for motorised travel and lead to an 
increase in walking, cycling and public transport.
//
Economic growth is also being supported through 
provision of superfast broadband for premises that 
require it and the spread of enhanced internet speed 
connectivity to areas which currently lag behind the 
government’s vision for increased coverage across 
the UK. Building on extended broadband availability 
investment, the opportunity is being taken to make 
more government services available online and increase 
the number of people who can use these online 
channels whilst also improving the efficiency of the 
public service delivery through the same approach. 
The past 10 years have seen unparalleled improvements 
in all aspects of water and wastewater services as 
measured independently by Northern Ireland’s Utility 
Regulator and there is a programme to enhance the 
existing network to meet new demand and upgrade 
the existing infrastructure to ensure sustained service 
delivery and environmental performance. Work is 
continuing to help ensure that the supply of housing 
across all tenure sectors meets demand.
//
Encouraging innovation and enhancing research is 
one of Northern Ireland’s priority growth drivers, with 
a focus on building a society and an economy which 
is renowned for its innovation, entrepreneurship 
and creativity.
//
Action is being taken to embed innovation in the 
culture of every business in Northern Ireland. To 
date, achievements include 12 Small Business 
Research Initiative projects which procure research 
and development for public sector organisations, 
allowing these organisations to work with highly 
innovative companies to solve problems; £27 million 
of investment in R&D activity has been secured with 
58 companies engaging in R&D activities; and through 
Northern Ireland’s regional economic development 
agency, Invest Northern Ireland, 327 companies have 
engaged in innovation activities for the first time and 
£52 million investment in innovation activity has been 
secured.
//
The UK, along with a coalition of partners, established 
the Private Infrastructure Development Group (PIDG) 
in 2002, to overcome obstacles to private sector 
involvement in infrastructure development. It has 
created a range of specialised financing and project 
development subsidiaries designed to overcome these 
obstacles, committing US$3.6 billion to support 183 
projects in over 40 countries.
//
The UK’s Development Finance Institution, CDC, has 
invested over £700 million in infrastructure projects 
in a number of developing countries over the past 
three years, which acts as a key complement to the 
UK government’s policy and programming in resilient 
infrastructure.337 CDC’s focus within infrastructure is 
on addressing the very limited supply of energy, as 
well as tackling the connectivity and communication 
gaps that limit productivity and job creation in 
developing countries.
//
The UK has conducted in-depth diagnostic research 
and planned catalytic interventions in five countries 
(Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa, Brazil and Indonesia) 
to enhance the business environment and systemic 
capacity for digital access in excluded or underserved 
communities. The implementation of a programme 
focussed on these priorities is estimated to result in 
more conducive regulatory frameworks for inclusive 
digital access, in scalable models for affordable, safe 
and secure connectivity and in better digital skills and 
services for poor and excluded people. Models and 
learnings emerging from this work could be replicated 
to increase sustainable digital inclusion in least 
developed countries in the future.
//
The UK’s Invest Africa programme, established in 2016, 
aims to generate 90,000 jobs and support £1.2 billion 
of new manufacturing foreign direct investment by 
2025, by supporting new investors and improving the 
operating environment for manufacturing firms in 
selected African countries.
//
In 2018, the UK announced new Innovation 
Partnerships in South Africa, Kenya, and Nigeria. 
These partnerships are expected to stimulate significant 
economic growth and support the creation of 
thousands of new jobs. As part of this, regional tech 
experts will be deployed in Kenya and Nigeria to build 
links between the UK and Africa’s digital sectors, 
support start-ups, and help those in need of digital 
skills to get access to training.
//
Through the Newton Fund and Global Challenges 
Research Fund (GCRF), the UK is building research 
and innovation partnerships with 17 partner countries 
to support their economic development and social 
welfare, and to develop their research and innovation 
capacity for long-term sustainable growth.
//
The GCRF provides a funding stream to support cutting-edge research on global issues affecting developing 
countries. The GCRF strategy specifically addresses all 
17 Goals individually and collectively and requires 
awardees to demonstrate how their project will achieve 
impact against the Goals. From 2016 to 2021, the GCRF 
is investing £1.5 billion in harnessing the expertise of the 
UK’s world-leading researchers.
//
The long-term nature of the UK’s Industrial Strategy
means it is integral to promoting the objectives of Goal 
9 and more broadly, facilitating access to sustainable 
development throughout the UK. The Industrial 
Strategy Council (ISC), which comprises leading 
figures from business, academia and civil society, 
is providing impartial and unbiased evaluation of 
progress in delivering the UK’s Industrial Strategy aims. 
It met for the first time in the autumn of 2018 and 
is currently developing a series of measures to assess 
the implementation of the UK’s Industrial Strategy.
//
In Scotland, there are concerns that EU exit will impact 
funding for regeneration projects, research and 
development and infrastructure.
//
A major upgrade to the UK’s infrastructure is needed. 
In the second half of 2019 the National Infrastructure 
Strategy (NIS) will be published, setting out long-term 
priorities for economic infrastructure, and outlining 
how collaboration with the private sector will expand 
to deliver resilience. The NIS will contribute to core UK 
commitments, including transport, housing and urban 
development.
//
In Wales, delivery of digital infrastructure and 
broadband to remaining premises is increasingly 
expensive and challenging due to increased rurality 
and reduced clustering. However, further procurement 
activity has yielded an additional 26,000 premises for 
delivery between 2019 and 2021.
//
Since the 2008 financial crisis, the UK has faced 
the challenge of the ‘productivity puzzle’ where the 
productivity gap has widened substantially compared 
to competitors despite low unemployment levels. The 
Business Productivity Review will explore what firm-level actions would be most effective in improving the 
productivity and growth of businesses.
//
The UK’s EU exit provides challenges for industry 
to secure and regain economic and technological 
competence, competitiveness and industrial leadership 
at a national, European, and global level. However, 
the UK’s Industrial Strategy is focussed on tackling 
long-term structural issues in the UK and building an 
economy to be competitive over the next 20/30 years.
//
The UK will continue to champion inclusive and 
sustainable industrialisation to ensure it is equipped for 
the challenges and opportunities of new technologies 
and ways of doing business.
//
There is more to be done to ensure investment is more 
geographically-balanced throughout the UK. Local 
Industrial Strategies (LIS) are being developed through 
collaboration with Local Enterprise Partnerships and 
Mayoral Combined Authorities from 2019-2020, 
supporting balanced regional growth. The LISs will 
define local priorities for how cities, towns and 
rural areas will maximise their contribution to UK 
productivity, allowing places to build on distinctive 
strengths, better coordinate economic policy and 
improve collaboration across boundaries. This will 
require multiple local stakeholders working together to 
ensure no one is left behind.
//
As part of its ambition to deliver higher living 
standards, the UK has introduced the National Living 
Wage for all workers over 25. Over 60% of those 
benefiting from it are women. In the Good Work 
Plan of 2018, the UK commits to ensuring that workers 
can access fair, decent work and to strengthening 
employment rights.
//
The UK has a goal to see 1 million more disabled 
people in work by 2027, through initiatives such as 
the Access to Work scheme, which provides disabled 
employees with financial support for workplace 
adjustments and assistive technology.343 There has 
been progress, with over 700,000 more people with 
disabilities in work in 2019 than in 2015. The 
increase has also been affected by a number of external 
factors, such as the current strength of the overall 
labour market and rising disability prevalence.
//
The Work and Health Programme is using the expertise 
of private, public, voluntary and community sector 
providers to deliver sustained employment for disabled 
people, disadvantaged groups and the long-term 
unemployed. See Goal 4 for more on training for 
access to work.
//
Access to university has widened, particularly for 
ethnic minorities and those from disadvantaged 
backgrounds.
//
The UK is strengthening its policy and institutional 
framework on equality: the move of the Government 
Equalities Office to the UK government Cabinet Office 
supports a more coordinated approach. The Equality 
and Human Rights Commission is an independent 
national equality body and UN-recognised National 
Human Rights Institute.
//
The UK is recognised as one of the most progressive 
countries in Europe for LGBT rights by ILGA-Europe.346
The comprehensive LGBT Action Plan sets out 75 
commitments that the UK government will take in 
response to the 2018 LGBT survey findings. While over 
half of respondents (56%) felt comfortable being LGBT 
in the UK, on average they were less satisfied with their 
life nowadays than the general population.
//
Following the introduction of same sex marriage in 
England, Wales and Scotland, the UK is taking steps 
to address asymmetry in access to marriage and civil 
partnership. The Scottish Government has consulted 
on how to address this inequality in Scotland. After 
recently consulting the public about the Gender 
Recognition Act, the UK is considering how to make 
legal gender recognition less bureaucratic and intrusive 
for transgender people.
//
The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities guiding principles are integral to the UK’s 
approach to strengthening rights under the Equality 
Acts. The UK government published a revised National 
Planning Policy Framework in 2018 for England that 
expects local authorities to have planning policies which 
identify the type of homes needed for disabled people 
as well as other groups, using the UK government’s 
optional technical standards for accessible and adaptable 
housing (Goal 9 discusses access to transport and the UK 
government’s 2018 Inclusive Transport Strategy).
//
The 2017 General Election saw the most diverse 
UK Parliament ever: the proportion of female MPs 
increased from 29% to 32%, LGBT MPs from 6% to 
7%, and ethnic minority MPs from 6% to 8%.349 The 
UK is working with disability organisations to help 
political parties better support disabled candidates; in 
December 2018, a £250,000 interim fund, EnAble, 
was launched to support disabled candidates in local 
elections in England.
//
The Lammy Review of Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic 
(BAME) representation in the Criminal Justice System 
in 2017 highlighted disparities in outcomes. The UK 
has responded to all 35 recommendations, as reflected 
in its 2018 update publication. For example, the UK 
has set targets for diversity in Her Majesty’s Prison and 
Probation Service’s workforce, is listening to the views 
of offenders and black and minority ethnic (BAME) 
groups and improving ethnicity data collection to 
design policy accordingly.
//
The UK led a consultation on how mandatory ethnicity 
pay-reporting could improve fairness in the workplace. 
In the refresh of the Hate Crime Action Plan, the UK has 
committed additional funding to continue to protect 
places of worship from hate attacks, alongside just 
over £12.5 million for projects to tackle racially and 
religiously motivated hatred (see Goal 16).
//
Scotland’s National Performance Framework sets a 
common purpose for Scotland which has reducing 
inequalities at its heart. Tackling inequality is key to 
making Scotland a more successful nation and making 
progress across the Goals.
//
In 2016 Scotland held a nationwide conversation with 
over 7,000 people taking part in events and locally 
organised discussions, and nearly 17,500 people 
engaging online. This led to the Fairer Scotland 
Action Plan which contains commitments from a 
range of organisations to help build a more successful 
Scotland: one with low levels of poverty and inequality, 
genuine equality of opportunity, stronger life chances 
and support for all those who need it. The Plan is built 
on five high level ambitions to 2030: 
• A fairer Scotland for all.
• Ending child poverty.
• Strong start for young people.
• Fairer working lives.
• Thriving third age.
//
Scotland has a mature framework of legislation and 
policies to tackle inequality, including a Race Equality 
Framework for Scotland 2016 to 2030. It is recognised 
as a progressive nation on LGBT rights and same-sex 
couples have been able to marry in Scotland since 
16 December 2014. However, a 2017 study by LGBT 
Youth Scotland of more than 600 LGBT young 
people showed that, for example, 63% of LGBT young 
people surveyed who had experienced bullying believed 
that it had negatively impacted on their education.
//
It is paramount that efforts to tackle all forms of 
prejudice, including any linked to gender identity 
are continued. For example, Scotland is on its way 
to becoming the first nation in the world to have 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) inclusive 
education embedded in the curriculum. As part of 
work to improve the well-being and protect the human 
rights of Gypsy Traveller families, Scotland published 
the Improving educational outcomes for children and 
young people from travelling cultures: guidance. This 
assists schools, local authorities and other stakeholders 
to support engagement in education and adapt to 
diverse learner needs.
//
Families with a disabled person are more likely to be 
in poverty and a range of actions are in place to 
tackle this inequality including A Fairer Scotland for 
Disabled People: Our Delivery Plan to 2021, which 
was developed in partnership, and No One Left 
Behind: Next steps for employability support. Local 
and national government, employers and the third 
sector are working in partnership to halve the disability 
employment gap from its 2016 level, which would 
mean an estimated extra 130,000 disabled people in 
work in Scotland.
//
In Scotland the Access to Elected Office Fund provides 
financial support to pay for the additional impairment-related costs that disabled people face when running 
for elected office. This helps level the playing field with 
non-disabled candidates. It supported 39 disabled 
candidates in standing for election to local councils 
in 2017. 15 candidates were elected across Scotland, 
representing a range of disabilities, political parties and 
were gender-balanced.
//
In 2017, the Tackling Prejudice and Connected 
Communities Action Plan was launched to tackle hate 
crime and build community cohesion. Actions include 
work on under-reporting, third party reporting, data 
and public campaigns.
//
Scotland’s approach to public service reform is built 
on a recognition that inequalities tend to affect 
people, household and communities in complex and 
interconnected ways and therefore, a ‘whole system’ 
approach is utilised built on an understanding of people 
and communities. In law (Community Empowerment 
(Scotland) Act 2015) community planning is focussed on 
improving outcomes and tackling inequalities of income 
on locally identified priorities, including in places where 
communities experience the poorest outcomes. Both 
local and national government in Scotland have adopted 
a ‘place-based approach’.
//
Since 2015, Scotland has welcomed over 2,700 
refugees from the Syrian conflict across all 32 local 
authorities as part of the Syria Vulnerable Persons 
Resettlement Scheme.
//
The latest figures show that average disposable income 
per head in Wales is £15,835,356 around 80% of the 
overall UK value. Wales is committed to eliminating 
the gap in working age unemployment, and economic 
inactivity rates between Wales and the UK average 
within 10 years. The Employability Plan sets out the 
steps that Wales will take to help people into the right 
jobs and equip them with the right skills to progress. It 
builds on the community employability programmes, 
which will provide intensive mentoring and support 
to both engage participants and address the complex 
barriers to employment experienced by those furthest 
from the labour market.
//
Wales strongly supports measures that increase 
household income and continues to promote the 
adoption of the Foundation Living Wage across the 
public, private and voluntary sectors. The Welsh 
Government has been accredited as a Living Wage 
employer since 2015 and the National Health Service 
in Wales has paid the living wage since January 
2015. Local authority pay scales start from above the 
Foundation Living Wage level.
//
The employment rate among disabled people aged 
16-64 was 45.2% in 2018, which is lower than among 
people who are not disabled (80.3%). This means there 
was a disability employment gap of 35.1 percentage 
points. This gap has remained stable in recent years.357
Across all disabled people the disability pay gap in 
Wales in 2010-11 was 4.3%, whilst by 2015-16 
this figure had risen to 13.3%.358 The new Right to 
Independent Living Plan will be published in 2019.
//
The Welsh Government has brought in specific equality 
duties in order for public bodies to better perform 
and demonstrate their compliance with the UK Public 
Sector Equality Duty. The regulations place duties 
on the devolved public sector, including the Welsh 
Government, covering equality impact assessments, 
publishing and reviewing Equality Objectives and 
Strategic Equality Plans, engagement, pay differences, 
procurement, reporting arrangements and equality and 
employment information. In March 2016, the Welsh 
Government published refreshed Strategic Equality 
Objectives setting out its commitment to promote 
equality and inclusion. It is currently reviewing these 
and taking into account the findings of the Is Wales 
Fairer? 2018 report, published by the Equalities and 
Human Rights Commission, which describes how levels 
of inequality in Wales are increasing, and the need for 
more work in communities and all areas of life.
//
The Diversity in Democracy Programme supports 
people from diverse backgrounds to become more 
involved in local democracy and consider standing for 
elected office.
//
The number of hate crimes reported in Wales has 
nearly doubled since 2012/13, to 3,370 in 2017/18.359
To support community cohesion, eight Regional 
Community Cohesion Teams work across all 22 local 
authorities to fulfil the objectives of the community 
cohesion programme.
//
To introduce participants to Welsh language culture 
and life as well as to support community cohesion, the 
National Centre for Learning Welsh offers free Welsh 
lessons to refugees in partnership with the Welsh 
Refugee Council in Cardiff and in partnership with the 
Red Cross in Newport. There are also opportunities to 
learn the language informally at social gatherings.
//
Responsibility for asylum and immigration rests 
with the UK government rather than the Welsh 
Government. However, the successful integration of 
refugees and asylum seekers will require concerted 
effort on the part of the Welsh Government, Welsh 
public services and Welsh communities. Wales has 
an ambition to be a Nation of Sanctuary, and the 
Nation of Sanctuary – Refugee and Asylum Seeker 
Plan captures a range of actions to improve the lives 
of people seeking sanctuary in Wales, that can help 
reduce inequalities, increase access to opportunities 
and enable better relations between communities. 
There are commitments to ensure that refugees and 
asylum seekers can access health services throughout 
their asylum journey; are provided with information 
and advice to allow them to integrate into Welsh 
society from day one; are prevented from becoming 
destitute; and can access educational opportunities. 
The plan has been endorsed by the United Nation’s 
High Commissioner for Refugees.
//
The Welsh Government-funded Hub Cymru Africa 
and the Wales for Africa grants scheme that provides 
advice, training, support and small grants to the 
hundreds of groups in Wales working in partnership 
towards the Goals in Sub-Saharan Africa.
//
To promote a positive impact on the lives of minority 
ethnic people, work is ongoing to review the Minority 
Ethnic Development Fund, to introduce ethnic impact 
assessment and to address Gypsy, Roma, Traveller 
community issues. Work to revise and improve 
Northern Ireland’s racial equality legislation is also 
underway.
//
The Make the Call Wraparound Service aims to reach 
55,000 people to ensure that they are receiving all the 
benefits and support to which they are entitled. The 
scope of the Service is continuously evolving to help 
those in poverty, older people, and those experiencing 
illness or disability.
//
Disability employment support programmes up to 
the end of August 2018 have helped 2,259 people 
retain their employment.360 Monitoring is continuing 
of the life satisfaction score of people with disabilities 
alongside that of the wider population. Recent figures 
demonstrate that the average life satisfaction of people 
with a disability remains stable. Northern Ireland is 
committed to ensuring that a percentage of new social 
home starts are wheelchair accessible and 4% (61) of 
all new social home starts from January to March 2018 
were wheelchair accessible.
//
The Department for Communities facilitates a cross-departmental funding arrangement that supports 
Special Olympics Ulster in the provision of fundamental 
movement, physical activity and sports opportunities 
for people of all ages with learning restrictions.
//
Belfast Healthy Cities delivers the Child Friendly Spaces 
programme that seeks to put Child Friendly Places 
higher on the public sector agenda in Belfast and 
Northern Ireland by using feedback from children 
engagement events to influence options for planning 
policy and other place-shaping strategies, for example 
by developing guidelines for policymakers.
//
It also delivers the Healthy Ageing programme 
that aims to highlight the needs of older people in 
policy making processes by promoting the use of 
the Age Friendly Environments in Europe tool (AFEE) 
for establishing age-friendly programmes at local 
government level, particularly within the community 
planning process. A Health Equity programme 
under the same Belfast Healthy Cities initiative seeks 
to reduce health inequalities within Belfast and 
Northern Ireland by delivering Reducing Inequalities 
training to statutory and third sector stakeholders; by 
promoting the use of Health Equity Tool within relevant 
organisations; and by supporting the development of 
a Care Zone approach to tackling poor mental health 
levels in deprived communities through the support of 
a pilot project in north Belfast.
//
The UK works to reduce inequality globally by ensuring 
that people have access to opportunities and services, 
prioritising the most vulnerable, those caught in crises, 
and those most at risk of violence and discrimination. 
Between 2015 and 2018, it reached 26.8 million 
people with humanitarian assistance.361 Its policies and 
programmes are informed by country diagnostics that 
consider issues of inclusion.
//
Social protection investments have benefited the lives 
of millions of people (over 8.9 million between 2011 
and 2015), reducing vulnerability and empowering 
the disadvantaged. The UK has launched a £12 
million programme to promote and defend Freedom 
of Religion or Belief. In July 2018, the Prime Minister 
appointed Lord Ahmad as the Special Envoy on this 
issue, which has enabled better focussing of efforts.
//
To improve the international picture for LGBT rights, 
the UK Aid Connect funding mechanism includes a 
thematic programme over four years to advance LGBT 
inclusion. A programme to support LGBT and gender 
equality in the Commonwealth is working to repeal 
discriminatory laws and advance legal equality.
//
An estimated one billion people, 15% of the world’s 
population, are living with some form of disability.363
The UK hosted the first-ever Global Disability Summit 
raised global attention on a long-neglected issue, 
mobilised new global and national commitments on 
disability and showcased good practice, innovation 
and evidence from around the world. Over 320 
organisations signed the Charter for Change, openly 
committing to working together and stepping up 
ambition for disability inclusion. The UK has also 
successfully led international discussions to include a 
disability marker in the Official Development Assistance 
(ODA) statistics through the OECD Development 
Assistance Committee and will use this to monitor 
progress. The UK government’s Department for 
International Development’s (DFID) Disability Inclusion 
Strategy (2018 – 2023) sets out how it will put 
disability at the heart of everything it does.
//
The UK is an active participant in the Financial Stability 
Board (FSB), a key international grouping of finance 
and central bank officials, and leads by example on 
the implementation of the G20 and FSB’s post-crisis 
financial regulatory reforms. The UK also supported 
the work of the G20 ‘Eminent Persons Group’s 
recommendations on how to reform the global 
financial system to ensure sustainable, inclusive growth 
and improve financial surveillance.
//
The UK is committed to ensuring the representativeness 
of international financial institutions. As part of the 
capital increases for the World Bank Group agreed 
in 2018, the UK supported measures to rebalance 
shareholding and increase the representation of 
emerging and developing economies. The UK also 
supported reforms implemented in 2016 at the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) to protect the quota 
shares and voting power of the IMF’s poorest member 
countries, resulting in four emerging market economies 
being among the IMF’s 10 largest members.
//
The UK supported China and India joining the 
European Bank of Reconstruction and Development. 
It also actively supported the creation and growth 
of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, whose 
membership includes many developing countries.
//
The UK supports the UN Global Compact for Safe, 
Orderly and Regular Migration, both as a step forward 
in international co-operation to tackle irregular
//
migration and as a framework to help the international 
community deliver its commitments under the Goals. A 
new £75 million migration programme, Safety Support 
and Solutions Phase II is aimed at making migration 
safer and providing critical humanitarian support.
//
The UK is strongly committed to supporting refugees, 
the refugee convention and to enabling a longer term, 
more holistic approach to refugee assistance and 
protection. It is resettling 20,000 refugees into the UK 
through the Syria Vulnerable Persons Resettlement 
Scheme and up to 3,000 of the most vulnerable 
children and their family members from the Middle 
East and North Africa region by 2020. A ‘community 
sponsorship’ scheme enables local community groups to 
welcome and support the integration of refugees in the 
UK. The Integrated Communities Action Plan published 
in February 2018 set out a commitment to build a fairer 
society, and includes a focus on the effective integration 
of migrants in the UK (see Goal 11).
//
The UK remains committed to ensuring developing 
countries can reduce poverty through trading 
opportunities. The Taxation (Cross-Border Trade) Act 
enables the UK to put in place a UK trade preferences 
scheme for developing countries. The Act also 
enshrines into UK law the commitment contained in 
the Goals to provide duty-free, quota-free trade access 
for Least Developed Countries.
//
The UK committed in law in 2015 to spend 0.7% 
of national income on aid or Official Development 
Assistance (ODA) and has met this every year, spending 
£14.1 billion on ODA in 2017. It is focussing UK 
aid where the need is greatest, expanding work in 
the Sahel and Africa and meeting the ODA target of 
spending 0.15-0.2% of Gross National Income in the 
Least Developed Countries.
//
Over 50% of UK aid goes to the most fragile and 
conflict-affected states. As the UK’s development 
finance institution, the CDC invests capital in the 
poorest and most fragile countries; it has committed 
over £700 million in infrastructure projects in Africa 
and South Asia over the past three years (2015-17).
The Private Infrastructure Development Group (PIDG) 
set up by the UK and other donors delivers pioneering 
infrastructure: in 2017 PIDG committed US$487 million 
to infrastructure projects, facilitating US$2.5 billion of 
additional investment in some of the lowest-income 
countries (see Goal 9).
//
In 2017 alone, US$9.7 billion in remittances was 
sent from the UK. The UK is working to reduce the 
cost of remittances, for example by strengthening 
the regulatory environment, encouraging innovative 
financial technology (FinTech) solutions and improving 
transparency around costs and market competitors. It is 
enhancing competition, transparency and efficiency of 
remittances markets in several developing countries.
//
Tackling deep-seated prejudices within communities 
requires cultural change. The UK will work to address 
harmful gender stereotypes and gender norms, 
engaging with the media and schools. As part of 
the LGBT Action Plan, there will be more work with 
schools to prevent bullying and improve the police 
response to hate crime. The UK will strive to improve 
the representation of disadvantaged groups in public 
life and champion role models. It will champion LGBT 
rights in all international fora including delivering 
an international conference focussing on the issues 
LGBT people face around the world, and continue to 
engage closely with employers to build inclusion in the 
workplace.
//
Disability is growing in prevalence. 22% of the 
population in the UK is now disabled and this is set 
to grow as the population ages. In 2018, a UK 
government Inter-Ministerial Group on Disability and 
Society was established to drive forward action across 
government to tackle the barriers disabled people face 
to full inclusion. Opportunities that are enabling more 
disabled people to live increasingly independent lives 
will be seized, such as technology advances.
//
Given the intersections between inequalities, the 
UK’s ambition is to take an ever more co-ordinated 
approach to its work on equality. With the Government 
Equalities Office moving to the heart of the UK 
government in the Cabinet Office in April 2019, the 
government will do more to connect its action on 
LGBT and gender equality with its work reducing 
disparities for other disadvantaged groups such as 
ethnic minorities and people with disabilities. It will 
also do more to listen to disabled people and their 
representatives through the new Regional Stakeholder 
Forum, while also creating an engagement programme 
that will provide a listening platform for women with 
multiple barriers to influence policy. In Scotland, the 
range of policies and frameworks in place require 
effective implementation to meet this Goal; working in 
partnership is essential to achieving this. Further actions 
have emerged as part of the Race Equality Action Plan 
and Highlight Report, including addressing the barriers 
experienced by Gypsy Travellers.
//
Globally, the way to end poverty and inequality is 
through inclusive economic growth, jobs, investment 
and trade. Looking ahead, the UK will drive delivery 
of its Economic Development Strategy, published in 
2017, stimulating growth that creates productive jobs 
and spreads the benefits right across society. As a 
global leader in catalysing private finance to support 
the development agenda and tackle inequality among 
countries, the UK will mobilise greater volumes of 
international and domestic private capital at scale to 
deliver the Goals.
//
Through efforts by government, the private and 
civil society, the UK will work to build a more just 
world where no one is left behind. It will invest in 
access to services and opportunities for the most 
vulnerable. And it will support disaggregated data and 
increased research and evidence about the causes and 
consequences of extreme poverty, exclusion, violence 
and discrimination.
//
The UK is committed to providing safe, affordable, and 
sustainable transport systems which share the benefits 
of innovation with all of society. The UK government’s 
2018 Inclusive Transport Strategy outlines a programme 
for creating a transport system offering equal access for 
disabled people by 2030. A framework for monitoring 
the progress of this strategy has been published.
//
The ‘Future of Mobility’ is one of four Grand 
Challenges in the UK’s Industrial Strategy (see Goal 9). 
The 2019 Future of Mobility: Urban Strategy argues 
that mobility innovation should benefit all parts of 
the UK and all segments of society. Future Mobility 
Zones, with £90 million of funding, will trial a range 
of mobility services focussed on significantly improving 
mobility for consumers.
//
The National Risk Register outlines key risks with the 
potential to cause significant disruption to the UK, and 
sets out actions people and businesses can take to 
protect themselves.
//
In 2016, the rate of deaths from exposure to natural 
forces in England and Wales stood at 0.82 per million 
population, up from 0.62 per million population in 
2015. Climate change is not only a future challenge; 
experts are already observing changes in the UK’s 
climate and communities must be prepared to deal 
with the impacts.
//
The Office of National Statistics (ONS), working with 
a number of partners, is developing innovative data 
approaches to measure domestic targets set out in 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and 
creating new estimates of disaster mortality which align 
with hazards listed in the National Risk Register.
//
Creating healthy, environmentally-friendly cities is a 
priority across the UK. Air quality has improved since 
2010: by 2017 emissions of sulphur dioxide had fallen 
by 62%, nitrogen oxide by 29%, and PM2.5 (fine 
particulate matter) by 10%.375 The measures set out 
in the UK-wide Clean Air Strategy should cut the cost 
of air pollution by £1.7 billion every year by 2020, 
rising to £5.3 billion every year from 2030. The UK will 
set an ambitious, long-term target to reduce people’s 
exposure to a range of damaging pollutants, including 
particulate matter (PM) which the World Health 
Organization has identified as the most damaging 
pollutant.
//
In 2017, a UK-wide plan was launched to tackle 
roadside nitrogen dioxide concentrations, backed by 
£3.5 billion of investment.
//
In 2017, 5% of UK urban areas were classed as 
“publicly assessible green spaces”. Green spaces 
offer a common place to come together, overcome 
social isolation and break down barriers.
//
The 2017 Housing White Paper outlined ambitious 
plans to reform the housing market and boost the 
supply of homes in England. This includes measures 
to plan for the right homes in the right places, to 
build homes faster and diversify the housing market. 
Reforms to the National Planning Policy Framework
have ensured that England’s planning system supports 
housing supply objectives, and greater freedoms have 
been provided to allow local authorities to borrow for 
new homes.
//
In 2017-18, 222,190 additional homes (195,290 of 
which were new builds) were created in England, an 
increase of 17% since 2015/16. This brings the total 
number of additional homes created since April 2015 
to over 629,000, on track to meet targets to deliver a 
million homes by the end of 2020 and a half a million 
more by the end of 2022. A range of measures are 
being implemented and developed so that, by the 
middle of the 2020s, an unparalleled 300,000 new 
homes a year will be built in England.
//
Following the Grenfell Tower fire, work has been 
undertaken to remedy buildings with unsafe cladding 
and an Independent Review of Building Regulations 
and Fire Safety has been established. The Review’s 
findings are being taken forward to ensure residents of 
high-rise buildings are safe and feel safe.
//
Helping residents take control of planning and 
management in the places they live is essential; they 
have the knowledge and enthusiasm to shape, design 
and improve their neighbourhoods and more and more 
communities are stepping up to this.
//
In England’s Community Life Survey: 2017-18, 26% 
of respondents agreed that they are able to influence 
decisions affecting their local area. This has remained 
consistent since 2013-14. Over half of respondents (54%) 
said they would like to be more involved in the decisions 
local authorities make which affect their local area.
//
Through investments of £34.5 million in neighbourhood 
planning (2018-22) and £163 million in community 
housing (2018-20), residents are being given a bigger 
say over their communities’ future. Residents will decide 
where new homes, green spaces and other facilities 
should go and how they should look and feel.
//
The UK government’s Integrated Communities 
Strategy Green Paper and subsequent Action Plan 
set out a vision and plan for building stronger, 
closer communities where people – whatever their 
background – live, work, learn and socialise together.
//
In 2018, there were 5,160380 buildings or sites on 
Historic England’s Heritage at Risk Register compared to 
5,478381 in 2015, thanks to the imaginative solutions, 
partnerships and dedication that has been applied to 
guarding England’s heritage by the public, private and 
voluntary sectors.
//
Up to £55 million of the £675 million Future High 
Streets Fund has been allocated to regenerating 
heritage high streets across England. This will improve 
their physical and economic condition, increase 
community and investor confidence and pride in local 
places.
//
England’s 38 Local Resilience Forums bring together 
local and national stakeholders to work on preventing, 
handling and recovering from catastrophic incidents 
and adapting in response and have recently worked 
to improve communication flows to enhance the 
resilience of local communities.
//
Linked to the UK-wide Clean Air Strategy around £500 
million will fund the development of local plans, some 
of which include the introduction of charging Clean 
Air Zones. As of April 2019, 12 local plans have been 
approved in England and £200 million of funding 
disbursed.
//
Since 2015, 86 pocket parks have been created out 
of neglected urban spaces in England. In 2019, 
an additional £3.75 million of funding went to the 
Pockets Parks Plus programme for community groups 
in England to create and maintain small green oases in 
their local area.
//
Scotland’s National Performance Framework (NPF)
contains a national outcome that “we live in 
communities that are inclusive, empowered, resilient 
and safe”. Although much of the focus in this target 
is on cities, some of the actions and challenges in 
this goal have impact beyond cities. The Community 
Empowerment (Scotland) Act 2015 requires public 
sector organisations who deliver and resource local 
services to work together and with local communities, 
so they can improve outcomes on themes they agree as 
priorities for their area.
//
Scotland’s National Volunteering Outcomes Framework 
was developed over 2018 by the Scottish Government 
jointly with partners from the volunteer and community 
sector, local government and NHS, with academics and 
social researchers, and with volunteers.
//
A range of actions are relevant to empowering 
communities, including:
• Investment in housing – including the delivery of 
50,000 affordable homes over the 5-year period 
April 2016 to March 2021 and including 35,000 
homes for social rent.
//
• Scotland supports the delivery of flexible housing 
capable of being adapted to suit people’s changing 
requirements. Therefore, wherever possible, all 
homes are built to Housing for Varying Needs 
standards. In addition, flexibility continues to exist (if 
required) in the housing grant subsidy arrangements 
within the Affordable Housing Supply programme 
so that specialist housing can be provided in 
accordance with need, helping disabled people with 
more complex needs live independently in their own 
homes and older people to stay in their own homes 
for longer.
//
• Investment in transport (£1 billion per year in public 
and sustainable transport). In 2017/18, out of a 
total 525 million public transport journeys, 388 
million journeys were made by bus, 1.5% less than 
in 2016/17 and a fall of 8% over the last five years, 
but still accounting for 74% of all public transport 
journeys. In addition, Scotland is seeking to 
reduce emissions by: purchasing low emissions 
buses; phasing out the need for new petrol and 
diesel-powered cars or vans by 2032; and a £15 
million investment plan funding the installation of an 
additional 1,500 electric vehicle chargers in homes, 
businesses and on local authority land to support the 
ChargePlace Scotland Electric Vehicle network.
//
• In 2015 the Scottish Government published its air 
quality strategy ‘Cleaner Air for Scotland – The Road 
to a Healthier Future’ setting out a series of cross-cutting policy actions intended to deliver further air 
quality improvements. An independently-led review 
of the strategy, reviewing progress to date and 
identifying priorities for additional action, will be 
completed by the end of 2019.
//
• Participatory budgeting, involving communities more 
meaningfully in decisions backed by practical support 
at local and national level.
• Community ownership, including rights to buy and 
support through the Scottish Land Fund.
//
• City Region Deals – partnerships between local, 
Scottish and UK governments to bring about long-term strategic approaches to improving regional 
economies.
//
• Green Infrastructure Strategic Investment 
Fund where local government, public bodies 
environmental organisations and communities work 
together to deliver transformative change in some of 
Scotland’s most disadvantaged urban areas through 
the creation and improvement of green spaces.
//
• Historic Environment Scotland and Scottish Natural 
Heritage support safeguarding of cultural and 
natural heritage.
//
Having somewhere to call home is a basic human 
right. The Ending Homelessness Together: High level 
Action Plan, published in November 2018, provides 
a person-centred approach to individual needs. 
Putting prevention first, to minimise the risk of people 
becoming homeless. This includes a commitment to 
the ‘Housing First’ model, where people are allocated 
permanent tenancies with intensive wraparound 
support helping to prevent repeat homelessness.
//
Wales’s national well-being goals recognise the 
importance of cohesive communities that are attractive, 
viable, safe and well-connected.
//
Wales’s homelessness legislation has prevented 21,500 
households from becoming homeless between April 
2015 and December 2018. It is also on target to 
bring 5,000 empty homes back into use, with 3,634 
for 2016-17 and 2017-18.
//
Wales’s innovative housing programme has invested in 
new models and approaches to high-quality, near-zero-carbon affordable homes. Nearly 800 houses are under 
way and due for completion.
//
Wales is committed to providing access to safe, 
affordable, accessible and sustainable, transport 
systems. The Active Travel (Wales) Act 2013 is 
transforming walking and cycling infrastructure and 
encouraging behaviour change. An investment of £2 
million is being made in electric vehicle charging points 
in Wales.
//
In 2018, Wales awarded the 15-year, £5 billion Wales 
and Borders Rail service contract. Transport for Wales
will deliver the South Wales Metro, which will also 
inform the rollout of the model across Wales in North 
East and South West Wales.
//
In Wales older and disabled persons may travel for 
free on bus services throughout Wales. In 2017-18, 
almost half of all bus journeys in Wales were by older 
or disabled passholders. Since 2015 Wales has 
ensured that younger people aged 16 to 18 have 
received one-third fare discounts on bus fares, and this 
was extended in 2018 to include 19 to 21-year-olds 
throughout Wales.
//
Wales’s National Planning Policy is designed to 
ensure that planning decisions will improve the lives of 
both current and future generations and ensure that 
the planning system contributes towards sustainable 
development. Wales is developing a National 
Development Framework (NDF), a 20-year national 
spatial plan for Wales to coordinate the planning of 
homes, facilities and infrastructure sustainably.
//
The National Survey for Wales asked people to what 
extent they agreed or disagreed that they belong 
to the local area; people in the area from different 
backgrounds get on well together; and people in the 
area treat each other with respect. In 2016-17, 50% of 
people agreed with all three statements while around 
70% agreed with any one statement.
//
Welsh is an official language in Wales and an important 
part of Wales’s heritage. It is promoted and facilitated 
by the Welsh Language Commissioner.
//
The percentage of three to 15-year-olds who spoke 
Welsh daily was considerably higher than any other age 
group, with almost a quarter of them speaking Welsh 
daily. There has been an increase in the percentage of 
children whose parents said they spoke Welsh at home 
in the early 2010s, but in recent years has stabilised at 
around 10.4%.
//
The Priorities for the Historic Environment of Wales
plan outlines how significant historic buildings, parks 
and heritage sites are to the Welsh economy. In 2016, 
an estimated £963 million and over 40,000 jobs were 
contributed to the Welsh economy in the heritage 
sector, alongside tourism and construction.
//
In 2015, the percentage of listed buildings that were 
in a “stable” or “improving” condition was at 74%,392
consistent with previous years.
//
The Wales Resilience Forum and Local Resilience 
Forums connect local and national stakeholders 
working on preventing, handling and recovering 
from catastrophic incidents, adapting in response. 
‘Community Information on Risks in Wales’ provides 
information on the range of emergencies that could 
occur, and suggestions on what the general public and 
wider community can do.
//
Flood Risk Assessment Wales, 2019, estimates 245,118 
properties are at risk of flooding in Wales. This includes 
117,100 at high risk, 44,668 at medium risk and 
83,350 at low risk from all sources. By 2021 Wales will 
invest over £350 million in flood and coastal erosion 
risk management activities around Wales.
//
In 2019, construction work will start on coastal risk 
management works as part of a further £150 million 
programme of investment over three years across 
Wales. The Coastal Risk Management Programme 
allocates funding for schemes to reduce risk to over 
18,000 properties through projects to repair, replace 
and create new coastal defence systems.
//
Wales is improving air quality though a £20 million Air 
Quality Fund, a draft Clean Air Zone Framework, and 
temporary speed restrictions on some roads to tackle 
emissions hotspots. It will consult on a Clean Air Plan 
in 2019. The Clean Air Wales Programme seeks to 
reduce the burden of poor air quality on human health 
and the natural environment and achieve compliance 
with European and domestic legislative air quality 
obligations.
//
The Noise and Soundscape Action Plan for Wales
sets out plans to tackle noise pollution and improve 
soundscapes for happier, healthier communities. Noise 
maps inform a range of activities to be undertaken 
across Wales between 2018-23.
//
In 2016-17, the National Survey for Wales found 73% 
of people felt safe after dark: at home, walking in their 
local area, travelling by public transport or travelling 
by car felt safe in all four situations. Around 80% felt 
safe walking in the local area or travelling by public 
transport, while 97% of people felt safe when being at 
home and travelling by car.
//
There were 790,328 dwellings in Northern Ireland 
in April 2018, a rise of 7,056 (0.9%) from 2017 
(783,272).396 Progress is being made on delivering 
1,850 new social housing starts before the end of 
2019-20 and more than 1000 affordable homes 
through support for the Co-Ownership scheme.
//
The new £90 million Belfast Rapid Transit System 
introduced in 2018 aimed to encourage a shift from 
private cars to more sustainable, greener modes of 
transport, resulting in an increase of over 40,000 
passenger journeys per week when compared to Metro 
usage in the same period of 2017/18.397 Recognising 
the importance of providing accessible and inclusive 
public transport systems for disabled people and 
older people, the Inclusive Mobility Transport Advisory 
Committee helped design and develop the new Glider 
Rapid Transit service for Belfast.
//
Findings from the most recent Travel Survey for 
Northern Ireland data estimate that 26% of all journeys 
made were by walking, cycling or public transport in 
2017. This is similar to 2015 (25%) but is an increase 
from 2010 (20%).
//
Transport emissions increased 1.9% from 2015 to 
2016 following the inclusion of shipping emissions. 
In the long-term these are now 29.3% higher than in 
1990 reflecting an increased car ownership in Northern 
Ireland.
//
Annual mean levels of nitrogen dioxide averaged 
across 10 monitoring sites decreased from 37.7 µgm-3 
(micrograms per metre cubed) in 2011 to 33.4 µgm-3 in 2017. This decrease is potentially indicative 
of a longer-term decline. Air quality improvements 
have occurred as sustainable transport measures have 
shifted private car users towards public and active 
transport means, and also as older vehicles on the 
roads are replaced with newer vehicles with cleaner 
engine technologies. This has resulted in air quality 
improvements across towns and cities in Northern 
Ireland, particularly those in which there are large 
volumes of road traffic and/or vehicle congestion. An 
electric car charging network has been established 
across Northern Ireland with 470 charging points as of 
June 2018 (a 2.8% share of UK charging points). The 
number of charging points in Northern Ireland grew by 
3% from June 2017 to June 2018.
//
Hate crimes in all forms, crimes against the elderly, and 
sectarian crimes all involve a measure of disrespect 
for another person or their community based on their 
identity, culture, faith, sexual identity or vulnerability. 
Reducing crime and reoffending and increasing respect 
can lead to an increase in the number of and use of 
shared spaces as well as increase the feeling of safety in 
shared spaces. The 2017 Northern Ireland Life & Times 
survey found that around 70% of those asked said all 
leisure centres, parks libraries and shopping centres 
are “definitely” shared and open to both Protestants 
and Catholics. This is a significant increase on the 
year before (64% average) and is the highest figure 
recorded to date.
//
The fundamentally reformed local planning system has 
at its heart an increased emphasis on the importance 
of community participation, good design and positive 
place-making in furthering sustainable development. 
This includes the Strategic Planning Policy Statement for 
Northern Ireland ‘Planning for Sustainable Development’ 
(SPPS) and the ‘Living Places Urban Stewardship and 
Design Guide’ for Northern Ireland (2014) which 
are designed to ensure the planning system provide 
for places that encourage healthier living; promote 
accessibility and inclusivity; and contribute to how places 
are and feel. As a statement of policy on important 
matters that should be addressed across Northern 
Ireland, the SPPS must be taken into account in the 
preparation of Local Development Plans (LDPs) and the 
provisions of both documents are material to all decisions 
on individual planning applications and appeals.
//
Many cities around the world are facing challenges to 
address rising housing and infrastructure demands to 
support growing populations and rapid urbanisation, 
respond to the environmental impact of urban sprawl, 
and increase resilience and reduce vulnerability to 
disasters. The UK supports these across a wide range of 
activities.
//
From 2016-22, the UK’s £165 million Cities and 
Infrastructure for Growth (CIG) programme will be 
delivering sustainable urban development through 
direct technical assistance to national and local 
governments in Burma, Uganda and Zambia. CIG is 
supporting urban planning, local economic planning, 
financing urban infrastructure and improved access to 
urban services. It will expand its support to a new set of 
partner countries across Africa and Asia.
//
The UK supports smarter cities worldwide. With China 
for example, experiencing the largest urban migration 
of people in history, China-UK cooperation has helped 
establish smart-cities standards into China’s compulsory 
and people-centred “Smart Cities Evaluation Indicator”.
//
The indicator evaluates the performance of cities and 
guides future developments across urban planning, 
governance and improved services for city dwellers. 
Focus areas include strategic design, data-sharing, 
smart transport, healthcare, access to water and 
sanitation, and cyber safety.
//
The Prosperity Fund Future Cities programme will 
provide £80 million to reduce poverty and promote 
sustainable, inclusive economic growth in 19 cities 
across 10 countries. Urban development challenges are 
being tackled by urban planning, transportation and 
resilience. In South Africa for example, programming 
is helping Cape Town to better maintain water and 
sanitation infrastructure.
//
The UK is active in sharing expertise in dealing with 
the risk of natural catastrophes, tackling immediate 
large-scale infrastructure challenges and improving 
resilience to natural disasters. It is working with the 
World Bank to support resilience planning in Dar es 
Salaam, Tanzania. From 2015-20, through the £29.6 
million Building Urban Resilience for Climate Change 
programme, the UK is supporting national and local 
planning for resilient urban areas.
//
The UK is partnering with the International Finance 
Corporation to provide £106 million toward financing 
and construction of more energy efficient buildings in 
emerging economies in a programme announced in 
2018. Buildings account for around a fifth of global 
greenhouse gas emissions. Improving their design and 
construction is key to achieving the Goals.
//
The £27.5 million Climate Leadership in Cities 
Programme initiative supports cities in developing 
countries to plan for, and implement, ambitious actions 
through: 
• supporting 15 megacities in Latin America and Asia, 
to develop climate action plans, delivered by the C40 
cities network. 
• expanding the C40 Cities Finance Facility. 
• global research and advocacy to remove barriers 
to action, delivered by the Coalition for Urban 
Transitions.
//
Meeting the demands for appropriate, affordable 
housing remains a top priority across the UK. In 
Northern Ireland 24,148 households using social 
housing were in housing stress in 2017-18405 a 9.3% 
increase from 2014-15 (22,097).
//
In England, whilst housing development has improved, 
the current pace is too slow to meet demands. Homes 
England will be supported to become a more robust, 
independent delivery agent. This will ensure housing 
delivery is maximised and targets are met. In Scotland, 
under the Housing to 2040 programme, the Scottish 
Government has begun developing a vision for how 
Scotland’s homes and communities should look and 
feel in 2040 and the options and choices to get there. 
An initial period of stakeholder engagement took 
place in 2018 and further consultation is planned for 
autumn 2019. Scotland’s long-term spatial strategy for 
development and infrastructure - National Planning 
Framework 4 – will be developed following the 
Planning Bill, currently being considered by the Scottish 
Parliament.
//
While in England in 2018, the number of people 
sleeping rough on a single night fell for the first 
time since 2010, the rises in homelessness and 
rough sleeping seen in previous years remain a 
major challenge. The Rough Sleeping Strategy
outlines ambitious commitments, including to halve 
rough sleeping by 2022. Plans are reinforced by the 
Homelessness Reduction Act which puts prevention 
at the heart of local authorities’ response to 
homelessness.
//
The £76 million Rough Sleeping Initiative (RSI) is 
working with 246 local authorities to help people off 
the streets and boost the capacity of local authorities. 
In its first year, the RSI delivered over 1,750 new bed 
spaces, and helped areas with the highest levels of 
rough sleeping to hire more than 500 new staff. In 
2019, funding will support an estimated 2,600 bed 
spaces and 750 staff. Eleven Somewhere Safe to Stay 
hubs across England provide immediate shelter and 
rapid assessment for rough sleepers and those at risk 
of doing so. A further 20 were announced in May 
2019.
//
The LGBT Action Plan outlines commitments to better 
understand the causes of lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender (LGBT) homelessness and how their needs 
could be better met. Several initiatives are supporting 
LGBT survivors of domestic abuse, including an LGBT 
helpline and a local-led project providing independent 
living accommodation.
//
In February 2019, England’s Integrated Communities 
Action Plan was published. It recognises the importance 
of ensuring that everyone has the opportunity to 
progress, no matter their background. From supporting 
new migrants to settle into communities, to creating 
opportunities to connect with people from different 
backgrounds and improving the English language skills 
offer, the Action Plan includes a range of local and 
national measures to support stronger, more integrated 
communities. Integration is a collective endeavour. 
The Action Plan brings together commitments from 
partners across civil society, the public sector and 
government, as well as building an understanding of 
what works through Innovation Fund projects.
//
In Northern Ireland, community relations programmes 
are being delivered annually to improve both intra-and inter-community relations, create new shared and 
inclusive spaces, promote diversity, inclusion, tolerance, 
peace, reconciliation and appreciation of different 
cultures and traditions. These are delivered under the 
‘Together: Building a United Community Strategy’ 
and the Northern Ireland Executives ‘Good Relations 
Strategy’.
//
Many communities across the UK have not shared 
the proceeds of growth in the same way as more 
prosperous areas. This leaves some communities 
struggling to prosper and feeling isolated. Stimulating 
economic growth in areas of greatest need and reconnecting them, physically and digitally, to build 
a more united and connected nation is essential. In 
England, the £1.6 billion Stronger Towns Funds aims to 
address this by creating new jobs, training local people 
and boosting economic activity – with communities 
having a say on how the money is spent.
//
The UK is taking action to manage resources 
sustainably and to deal with waste responsibly.
//
The new Resources and Waste Strategy for England 
was published in December 2018. The Strategy sets out 
how the UK will preserve its stock of material resources 
by reducing waste, promoting resource efficiency and 
moving towards a circular economy (also Goal 8). The 
UK will also minimise the damage caused to the natural 
environment by decreasing and managing waste safely 
and carefully, and by tackling waste crime (also Goals 
14 and 15). Key actions include.
//
• consulting on plans to make producers pay the full 
cost of dealing with packaging waste, introducing a 
consistent set of recyclable materials to be collected 
across England from households and businesses and 
bringing in a deposit return scheme for drinks cans 
and bottles.
//
• voluntary agreements, delivered through the Waste 
and Resources Action Programme (WRAP), aimed 
at preventing waste in the food, packaging, and 
clothing sectors.
//
• reducing the landfilling of biodegradable 
municipal waste. The landfill tax escalator has 
achieved a dramatic impact with a circa 50% fall 
in manufacturing waste and a 60% fall in waste 
going to landfill. The UK remains on course to meet 
obligations to reduce landfilling of biodegradable 
municipal waste under the Landfill Directive, limiting 
this to 35% of the 1995 level by 2020.
//
The UK does not have any fossil fuel subsidies, 
according to the definition it shares with European G20 
partners. The UK also supports the G20 commitment to 
rationalise and phase out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies 
that encourage wasteful consumption.
//
In April 2018 WRAP launched the UK Plastics Pact, 
a collaborative initiative that is designed to create a 
circular economy for plastics (also Goal 14). As of 2019, 
it brings together signatories accounting for over 80% 
of the plastic packaging placed on the UK market. The 
Pact focusses on delivering four world-leading targets 
by 2025:
• taking actions to eliminate problematic or 
unnecessary single-use packaging items through 
redesign, innovation or alternative (reuse) delivery 
models. 
• 100% of plastic packaging to be reusable, recyclable 
or compostable. 
• 70% of plastic packaging should be effectively 
recycled or composted. 
• 30% average recycled content across all plastic 
packaging.
//
All four nations in the UK have introduced charges 
to limit the use of plastic bags. A 5 pence single-use carrier bag charge was introduced in England 
in October 2015 for retailers with 250 or more 
employees. WRAP reported that in 2014, the main 
retailers circulated 7.64 billion single-use carrier 
bags in England.410 UK government Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) data 
show that the main retailers sold 1.04 billion single-use carrier bags in 2017/18, a reduction of over 80% 
on the number of carrier bags since the charge was 
introduced.411 The UK government recently consulted 
on proposals to extend and increase the charge.
//
The UK has already banned the use of plastic 
microbeads in rinse-off personal care products. A ban 
on the supply of plastic straws, drinks stirrers and 
cotton buds will come into force in England in April 
2020 (with exemptions to ensure that those with 
medical needs or a disability can continue to access 
plastic straws). The UK government will continue to 
review the latest evidence on problematic products 
and/or materials.
//
An estimated 10 million tonnes of food and drink 
are wasted post-farm gate annually in the UK, 
worth around £20 billion. The UK has large-scale 
interventions in place aimed at reducing food waste 
across supply chains and within households. WRAP 
has launched Courtauld 2025 which is an ambitious 
voluntary agreement that brings together organisations 
across the food system to make food and drink 
production and consumption more sustainable.
//
The UK recently produced a Food Waste Reduction 
Roadmap for the food business to deliver against 
Global Target 12.3. The UK supports WRAP’s ‘Love 
Food Hate Waste’ campaign which provides advice and 
guidance to consumers to help them to waste less food 
and save money.
//
Household waste recycling rates in England have risen 
from around 11% in 2000/1 to about 45% in 2017.
In 2016/17 in England, local authorities recycled, 
composted or reused 11.3 million tonnes of the waste 
they collected (far outweighing the 4.1 million tonnes 
that were landfilled).
//
A consultation was launched in February 2019 to 
gather views on a consistent set of recyclable materials 
and consistent labelling on packaging.
//
The UK also supports WRAP’s consumer-facing 
campaign on recycling ‘Recycle Now’ used by over 
90% of English local authorities which encourages 
positive recycling attitudes and behaviours.
//
The UK’s Greening Government Commitments set 
out the actions UK government departments and 
their agencies will take to reduce their impact on the 
environment. These commitments aim to reduce the 
environmental impact of government operations, 
including through procuring more sustainable products. 
Departments have already achieved a 39% reduction 
in emissions compared to a 2009/10 baseline; diverted 
87% of waste from landfill; halved paper consumption 
and reduced the number of domestic flights taken by 
civil servants and ministers by 28%.
//
The UK supports the sustainability of supply chains 
for example through the Sustainable Clothing Action 
Plan; a voluntary, industry-led framework which aims 
to minimise the environmental impacts of the clothing 
industry. So far over 80 organisations across the UK 
have made a pledge to reduce their carbon and water 
footprints by 15%, and waste by 3% per tonne of 
clothing by 2020. 
//
The UK government also supports WRAP’s ‘Love Your 
Clothes’ campaign which aims to raise awareness of 
the value of clothes and encourage people to make the 
most of the clothes they already have.
//
Providing clear and credible information to consumers 
is key to supporting remanufacturing and resource 
efficient business models. The Ecodesign directive has 
been used to improve the environmental performance 
of products and reduce energy and resource 
consumption. The UK uses the EU Ecolabel scheme to 
help provide consumers with better information on 
the sustainability of their purchases through product 
labelling.
//
The tourism industry in the UK accounted for around 
6.4% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2016416 and 
the British Tourist Authority (VisitBritain) works on 
tourism issues. Sustainability is being considered as part 
of the proposed Tourism Sector Deal,417 including in 
terms of reducing the negative impacts of seasonality 
and focussing on clean growth. The tourism sector has 
the potential to make a significant contribution to the 
Goals and work is underway across the UK to support 
these ambitions.
//
The UK advocates for tough measures to improve 
chemical management and safety internationally. The 
UK has ratified and complies with four international 
United Nations Conventions418 and is also active in the 
multi-stakeholder, multi-sectoral voluntary framework 
of the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals 
Management (SAICM).
//
Emissions of hazardous substances have declined 
significantly in the UK between 1990 and 2016. 
In particular, by 2017 the total UK emissions of 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls reduced by 92% from levels 
in 1990.
//
The UK is also working to address legacy issues 
including Persistent Organic Pollutants in products 
and their disposal. The UK is exploring policy options 
to introduce a waste tracking system and establish a 
National Materials Database.
//
UK emissions of mercury to air have declined by 
94% over the last 50 years. This is a result of tighter 
regulatory controls and restrictions.420 The UK 
government committed in its 25 Year Environment Plan
to reduce remaining land-based emissions of mercury 
to air and water by 50% by 2030.
//
Reports to the Pollution Inventory from regulated 
industries in England show that emissions to controlled 
waters from regulated industries have remained 
relatively constant between 140 to 220 kg per 
annum.
//
Hazardous waste accounts for 2% of UK waste, 
with 4.3 million tonnes consigned in 2014.422 The 
2010 Strategy for Hazardous Waste Management 
in England set out important principles that aim to 
reduce hazardous waste. The UK has also ratified the 
Basel Convention, which includes a global control 
mechanism for the import and export of hazardous 
and other wastes. An Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) Decision 
(C(2001)107/FINAL) also provides a mechanism for 
controlling the movements of wastes destined for 
recovery. The Convention and Decision have been fully 
implemented in UK law. The UK Plan for Shipments of 
Waste provides stricter controls on the movement of 
waste destined for disposal, generally prohibiting their 
import and export. The UK will continue to engage 
through the Basel Convention to improve the quality of 
plastic waste exported for recycling.
//
Scotland published its circular economy strategy 
Making Things Last in 2016 and partners in Scotland 
are working to promote and showcase more circular 
practices. A Circular Economy Investment Fund offers 
£18 million as grant funding to small- and medium-sized enterprises who are helping to create a more 
circular economy. There are many area-based initiatives 
such as in Tayside, Glasgow and Edinburgh which are 
based on partnership approaches between Chambers 
of Commerce, local authorities and others.
//
Growing the nation in ways that make Scotland’s 
natural capital available for future generations is the 
core of One Planet Prosperity, Scottish Environment 
Protection Agency’s (SEPA) regulatory strategy.
//
Through the strategy SEPA is developing ambitious 
and innovative approaches that help the businesses it 
regulates to reduce water, energy and materials use in 
ways that improve businesses’ profitability and long-term viability.
//
Scotland has targets for waste reduction: 33% 
reduction in waste by 2025, waste prevention (15% 
reduction in waste from 2011) and recycling (70%) 
for 2025, as well as targets and regulations to reduce 
landfilled waste (banning biodegradable municipal 
waste to landfill from 2021 and setting a target of just 
5% of all waste going to landfill by 2025).
//
Scotland has developed the Scottish Household 
Recycling Charter which seeks to provide more 
consistent collection and make it easier for people to 
recycle the right things and support the creation of 
new jobs in Scotland.
//
Other relevant actions include sustainable tourism, 
and campaigns to reduce food waste. The Food Waste 
Reduction Action Plan was launched in April 2019 
and will take a sector-based approach to tackle food 
waste in Scotland. By the end of 2019 there will be 
public consultations on removing the current rural 
exemption for food waste collection, mandatory food 
redistribution for businesses of a certain size and 
the possibility of mandatory food waste reporting in 
Scotland.
//
Scotland’s Deposit Return Scheme will deal with 
empty drinks containers aiming to bring an increase in 
recycling, improve the quality of material collected for 
recycling, help combat littering, and prevent plastic and 
other materials polluting rivers, oceans and countryside.
//
The Expert Panel on Charges and other measures 
is considering how best to move forward action on 
single-use plastic items taking account of the needs 
and rights of people with disabilities. The Scottish 
Government has already taken action on plastic 
cotton buds and microbeads. The Expert Panel is also 
considering how to tackle the dependence on single-use coffee cups.
//
Scotland has a range of sustainable procurement 
measures in place. The Procurement Reform (Scotland) 
Act 2014 includes a Sustainable Procurement Duty that 
requires public bodies to consider how procurement 
could be used to improve social, economic and 
environmental well-being and enable small- and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), supported businesses 
and the third sector to access contract opportunities. 
Statutory guidance and sustainable procurement 
tools have been developed to help buyers consider a 
range of social, economic and environmental factors 
including: climate change; employment, skills and 
training; equality; and fair and ethical training.
//
To decrease Wales’s ecological footprint, Wales 
is adopting more sustainable ways of managing 
natural resources and is changing the ways goods are 
consumed and produced. In 2016, Wales enacted the 
Environment (Wales) Act, to plan and manage Wales’s 
natural resources in a more proactive, sustainable 
and joined-up way. This legislation sets the strategic 
landscape for Wales’s transition to a more circular 
economy. A new Resource Efficiency Strategy and 
Circular Economy Route map will be consulted on later 
this year, detailing next steps towards zero waste.
//
Wales’s waste strategy Towards Zero Waste sets out 
how the Welsh Government will deal with waste 
in a way that produces benefits for not only the 
environment, but also for the Welsh economy and 
people’s well-being in Wales. Wales plans to become a 
zero-waste nation by 2050.
//
Wales has also made significant progress in recent years 
in reducing the amount of food unnecessarily thrown 
away. Wales was the first nation in the UK to introduce 
a landfill allowances scheme to reduce the amount of 
biodegradable municipal waste sent to landfill. 99% 
of households in Wales can access weekly food waste 
collections, diverting large amounts of waste away 
from landfill. Figures show a reduction of household 
food waste in Wales of 12% per person between 2009 
and 2015.
//
Good sustainable procurement practice is promoted 
through the 10 principles of Wales Procurement Policy 
Statement to maximise the impact of the £6 billion 
annual public procurement spend in Wales. As a 
result, Wales-based suppliers won 52% of this annual 
expenditure in 2018, up from 35% in 2004.
//
The Sustainability Risk Assessment (SRA) ensures 
sustainability is addressed at the planning stage. The 
SRA is required for all procurements over £25,000 and 
is used to identify and mitigate sustainability risks and 
to maximise sustainability opportunities.
//
Visit Wales has developed a number of programmes 
and tools over recent years aimed at helping 
destinations as well as individual businesses become 
more sustainable. Cadw, Wales’s historic environment 
service, has been actively integrating ‘best practice’ 
towards carbon reduction both across the properties 
in the care of Welsh Ministers and the wider historic 
environment.
//
Wales uses a range of measures to influence sustainable 
behaviours. In 2011, Wales became the first nation 
in the UK to introduce a minimum charge of 5 pence 
on all single-use carrier bags. The policy has resulted 
in a significant reduction in their use. In 2018, Wales 
enacted the Landfill Disposals Tax Act, to ensure the 
environmental cost of landfilling waste is identified 
and encourage greater prevention, reuse, recycling 
and recovery of waste. The tax is paid when waste is 
disposed of to landfill and is charged by weight. The 
Act includes provisions for charging tax on unauthorised 
disposals of waste, creating a financial deterrent for 
people seeking to dispose of waste illegally.
//
In 2008 Wales became the world’s first Fair Trade 
Nation, and to-date, 68 Welsh towns and counties have 
achieved Fairtrade status. Many public bodies, including 
the Welsh Government, now procure Fairtrade products 
such as tea, coffee and sugar as standard.
//
Within Northern Ireland, rates of household waste that 
is reused, recycled or composted, has increased from 
39.8% in 2012/13 to 48.1% in 2017/18.425 The ‘waste 
from households’ rate for 2017/18 is 47%. Recycling of 
household waste has increased with improvements of 2 
and 4 percentage points respectively over the last two 
years. This represents very positive progress.
//
Within Northern Ireland, the Food Waste Regulations 
and other support to the waste management strategy 
have helped to drive increases in rates of reuse, 
recycling or composting of household waste.
//
The UK leads internationally on waste prevention 
and management and continues to engage in global 
forums such as the 12.3 Champions Group, United 
Nations Environment (UNE), the G20 and the UN 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The UK is 
also playing an active part in the 10-Year Framework 
of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and 
Production Patterns (10YFP) adopted at the United 
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development 
(Rio+20) in 2012.
//
The UK is directly involved in the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) Consumer Information 
Programme as one of only five countries on the 
Advisory and Steering Committee. In addition, the UK 
will also continue supporting the wider work of the 
10YFP as a member of the Western Europe and Others 
Regional Group. Efforts will be focussed on measures 
which impact on both ends of the supply chain and 
which are aimed at improving resource efficiency.
//
The UK government is funding a project with UNEP 
called Global Industrial Symbiosis Programme (GISP) to 
help participating countries increase their ambition in 
reducing emissions and help deliver actions.
//
The UK is fully engaged in promoting resource 
efficiency as a member of the G7. The G7 Alliance 
for Resource Efficiency brings together business, 
academia and policymakers to share best practice and 
case studies not only within the G7 but with emerging 
economies as well.
//
n April 2018 the UK and co-chair Vanuatu announced 
the Commonwealth Clean Ocean Alliance (CCOA), a 
ground-breaking initiative working with Commonwealth 
partners to reduce marine plastic pollution (Goal 12 
targets 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.a and also 14.1), commit to 
action on plastics, share best practice, leverage funding 
and push for global action. The UK has also committed 
over £55 million to drive research and innovation 
globally and support developing countries stop plastic 
from entering the oceans.
//
The UK has signed up to the G7 Ocean Plastic Charter 
to move toward a more resource-efficient and 
sustainable approach to the management of plastics 
across their lifecycle.
//
The UK is already taking steps towards the sound 
management of chemicals and waste (also Goal 14). The 
UK government contributed £210 million in the period 
2014 to 2017 to the Global Environment Facility (GEF).427
This supports projects on chemicals and waste issues 
in developing countries, particularly issues associated 
with the Conventions and the Strategic Approach to 
International Chemicals Management (SAICM).
//
As a member of a Ministerial High Ambition 
alliance for chemicals and waste, the UK is raising 
awareness, promoting accountability, cooperation and 
international action on chemicals and waste to protect 
human health and the environment.
//
The UK is helping to shape SAICM’s post-2020 
framework and improve chemical management in 
countries across the world. The UK is also working with 
international partners within the OECD’s Environment, 
Health and Safety Programme to develop tools and 
guidance that can be used by regulatory agencies 
and industry worldwide in assessing chemical safety. 
These are used to risk assess chemicals on the market, 
including new technologies such as nanomaterials, 
and to reduce adverse impacts of chemicals on human 
health and the environment.
//
In the last few years recycling services have continued 
to evolve with new material streams being added and 
changes to frequency of collections. Consequently, 
people need to stay up-to-date with what to recycle 
and how.
//
Changing consumer behaviours can be challenging. 
The right infrastructure can help to change society’s 
mindset, as will appropriate enforcement measures 
that nudge people to ‘do the right thing’. The policies 
in the Resources and Waste Strategy for England seek 
to speed up this process – helping people value the 
resources that pass through their hands and helping 
them to keep those resources in use.
//
Despite advances in technology in recent decades, the 
average lifespan of many products is actually lower 
than it was 20 years ago. It will be challenging to 
extend the lives of products through repair, reuse and 
remanufacture. It is also challenging to help consumers 
recycle the materials they contain and dispose of them 
in the most environmentally sensitive ways.
//
In Scotland the implementation of a deposit return 
scheme is an important next step, and closely linked 
to actions to respond to the pressing issue of climate 
change.
//
Improving the data available through a measurement 
framework for waste reduction will support Scotland’s 
progress to this Goal.
//
Further shifts in consumer behaviour will require work 
and collaboration across Scotland. The complexity 
and length of supply chains can make it challenging 
to regulate production and standards with regards to 
materials used, product design and good practice.
//
The Welsh Government will be consulting during 2019 
on plans to increase recycling targets and halve food 
waste in Wales by 2025 in Wales’s forthcoming waste 
strategy. The consultation will include a routemap to 
Wales moving towards a circular economy.
//
The UK is at the forefront of international efforts to 
find simpler and cheaper methods to measure food 
waste. WRAP is currently working with UNE and 
FAO to develop reporting tools that enable as many 
countries to report as possible.
//
The Resource and Waste Strategy for England sets out 
further measures on food waste including to:
• more effectively redistribute food to those who need 
it most before it can go to waste. 
• consult on annual reporting of food surplus and 
waste by food businesses. 
• consult on legal powers to introduce food waste 
targets and surplus food redistribution obligations. 
• publish a new food surplus and waste hierarchy. 
• promote awareness of the issue by appointing a new 
food waste champion. 
• support cross-sector collaboration through the 
Courtauld 2025 agreement.
//
Scotland’s Food Waste Reduction Action Plan sets out 
the following measures:
• consult on annual reporting of food surplus and 
waste by food businesses and potential national 
food waste reduction targets. 
• consult on removing the current Scottish rural 
exemption for food waste collection. 
• consult on obligations for food retail sites over 
a certain size to ensure they redistribute edible 
products in line with the food waste hierarchy. 
• establish a Food Waste Hub which would become 
a one stop shop for expertise on food waste in 
Scotland and coordinate action and research. 
• promote awareness of the issue by running targeted 
communication and marketing campaigns.
//
The Global Resource Initiative (GRI) is being established 
to ensure that the UK’s global commodity supply 
chain footprint on land, natural resources and 
ecosystems is sustainable, avoids deforestation and 
other environmental degradation, and supports jobs, 
livelihoods and investment in resilient and sustainable 
food systems. In 2019, the UK is convening a high-level 
GRI Taskforce to prepare and publish a report with 
ambitious and practical recommendations to promote 
sustainable supply chains.
//
Minimum Ecodesign requirements have been used 
in the UK and elsewhere to transform the design of 
energy-using products to reduce energy consumption. 
The UK wants to see the requirements expanded to 
include material efficiency, gradually remove from 
the market the least resource-efficient products and 
establish a minimum level of resource efficiency.
//
Five million tonnes of plastic are used in the UK 
every year. Plastics are found in clothes and shoes, 
in products on supermarket shelves, in vehicles and 
buildings. Without action between 2015 and 2025 
marine plastic pollution is set to treble world-wide to 
150 million tonnes.
//
The UK priority will continue to be preventing plastic 
entering the environment and eliminating avoidable 
plastic waste over the lifetime of the UK government’s 
25 Year Environment Plan. However, in identifying 
alternatives to plastic it is important to avoid 
unintended consequences and clarify understanding of 
the trade-offs of different products and materials. The 
UK government has made upwards of £100 million of 
funding available for research and innovation on plastic 
waste.
//
The Scottish Government have established an Expert 
Panel to advise on difficult to recycle plastic items, like 
single-use disposable beverage cups.
//
In order to ensure the sound management of chemicals 
and waste, the UK government will publish a strategy 
to set out its future approach to chemicals. The UK 
government also aims to establish practical means of 
tracking chemicals in products to reduce barriers to 
recycling, reduce risks from harmful chemicals and 
manage waste safely; and strengthen the international 
standardisation of methods that assess chemicals 
safety.
//
The UK undertakes intelligence-led compliance 
checks preventing illegal exports of waste to make 
sure waste is dealt with in an environmentally-sound 
manner. The UK is also working to ensure the highest 
standards of protections for consumers, workers, and 
the environment are maintained in trade agreements. 
The UK will play a lead role in developing goals for 
international chemical management beyond 2020 and 
will support countries to develop effective chemical 
and waste management regimes. Further research 
and development may be needed to develop methods 
to identify substances of concern and support other 
countries in doing the same.
//
Climate change is not just a future challenge-experts 
are already observing changes in the UK’s climate. The 
rate of deaths in England and Wales from exposure to 
natural forces stood at 0.8 per million population in 
2016, up from 0.6 per million population in 2015.429
Projections show an increased chance of milder, wetter 
winters and hotter, drier summers along with an 
increase in the frequency and intensity of extremes.
//
The National Adaptation Programme, which is 
primarily for England, sets out what government and 
others will be doing to be ready for the challenges of 
climate change. It forms part of the five-yearly cycle 
of requirements laid down in the Climate Change 
Act 2008 to drive a dynamic and adaptive approach 
to building the UK’s resilience to climate change. The 
UK government is also required to publish a UK-wide 
Climate Change Risk Assessment every five years. This 
serves as a foundation to understanding the specific 
risks and opportunities that climate change poses to 
the UK. The UK is also encouraging action on building 
resilience outside government, through the Adaptation 
Reporting Power. Under this power, infrastructure 
groups and public bodies are invited to report on their 
preparedness for climate change. 88 organisations, 
including a range of infrastructure providers, regulators, 
and public bodies, have confirmed their participation in 
the third round of reporting so far.
//
£2.6 billion is also being invested between April 2015 
and March 2021 to better protect the country from 
flooding and coastal erosion. This includes over 1,500 
schemes, which will better protect 300,000 homes in 
that period. The Environment Agency regularly reviews 
the investment programme to take into account serious 
flooding, local partnership funding contributions and 
new flood risk information. The latest update was in 
March 2019.
//
The UK government has already committed to the 
largest increase in public spending for investment 
in science, research and innovation in almost 40 
years.433 This will be invested to catalyse low carbon 
innovation across multiple sectors of the economy. 
The UK has also committed to upgrading the digital, 
energy, transport, housing, water and flood defence 
infrastructure, including through investment in the 
National Productivity Investment Fund, with annual 
central government infrastructure investment rising 
each year from around £2 billion in 2016/17 to over £5 
billion in 2020/21. These investments will strengthen 
market demand for the innovative new clean energy 
technologies and services that businesses are creating.
//
The UK is developing and implementing nature-based 
solutions through the Clean Growth Strategy, for 
example, by providing funding for woodland expansion 
and peatland restoration. In addition, as part of 
the implementation of the UK government 25 Year 
Environment Plan, £50 million of funding has been 
announced for a new Woodland Carbon Guarantee 
to stimulate domestic carbon offsetting and incentivise 
new tree planting; and £10 million of funding in 
the October 2018 Budget for a Challenge Fund to 
plant and maintain at least 100,000 urban trees and 
contribute towards planting one million new trees in 
urban areas.
//
The Climate Change Act 2008 introduced the world’s 
first legally-binding target to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by at least 80% by 2050 relative to 1990 
levels.435 Following the report in October 2018 by 
the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) on the impacts of 1.5°C of warming, the UK 
commissioned its independent advisers, the Committee 
on Climate Change (CCC) to provide advice on its 
long-term targets. The CCC recommended that the UK 
legislates for a net zero target and in June 2019 the 
UK government laid draft legislation to set a new net 
zero greenhouse gas emissions target for the UK, to be 
delivered by 2050. This world-leading target will bring 
to an end the UK’s contribution to climate change.
//
UK emissions were 42% below 1990 levels in 2017.436
To ensure steady progress, the Climate Change Act 
2008 requires the UK government to set intermediate 
targets or ‘carbon budgets’. These are caps on 
emissions across the UK during a five-year period and 
are amongst the most stringent targets in the world. 
The UK has legislated for five carbon budgets to date, 
requiring a 57% cut in emissions by 2028-2032 from 
a 1990 baseline.
//
Under the Climate Change Act 2008, the UK is 
mandated to address climate change through 
adaptation frameworks and activities. The principal 
adaptation activities of the UK are currently reported 
in the Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA); 
the National Adaptation Programme (NAP); and the 
Adaptation Reporting Power (ARP). See section 13.1 
for information.
//
The UK government has put the transition to clean 
growth at the heart of its Industrial Strategy and is 
committed to making the UK a global leader in low-carbon jobs, investment and exports. The UK is making 
progress across the economy to support that transition, 
including through the development of a Green 
Finance Strategy; the announcement of missions to 
halve the energy use of new buildings by 2030 and to 
establish the world’s first net zero cluster by 2040; the 
commitment to end the sale of conventional petrol and 
diesel cars by 2040; and publication of an action plan 
for Carbon Capture, Usage and Storage.
//
The UK government is working to ensure that across 
society, people understand the challenges and risks 
which lie ahead. The UK’s world-leading economic, 
science and technical skills (including, for example, its 
scientists at the Met Office, the landmark 2006 Stern 
Report and the New Climate Economy report) have 
shaped the global debate around climate change. 
Under the 2018-2021 Met Office Hadley Centre 
Climate Programme, the Met Office have increased 
their commitment to communicating climate change to 
a wider range of audiences. The Met Office has made 
its climate observations, predictions and projections 
more accessible online including by adding interactive 
webpages on climate change impacts at global and UK 
scale, and its new Climate Programme will continue 
to focus on exploring innovative ways to visualise and 
communicate climate data.
//
The UK recognises the importance of teaching young 
people about climate change. The natural and man-made causes of climate change are studied in the 
primary and secondary curriculum, while in 2017 a 
new environmental science A-level was introduced. 
This will enable pupils to study topics that will support 
their understanding of climate change and how it can 
be tackled.
//
Tackling climate change is a defining challenge and 
a moral imperative. The First Minister of Scotland 
declared a global climate emergency in April 2019 and 
Scotland is acting accordingly. Scotland’s contribution 
to climate change will end within a generation. 
Scotland has already almost halved emissions 
since 1990 while growing the economy, increasing 
employment and productivity.437 Scotland’s transition to 
a net zero economy will be just and fair to everyone.
//
Scotland has a long-established statutory framework 
for mitigating and adapting to climate change, which 
is subject to ongoing scrutiny and review. The Climate 
Change (Scotland) Act 2009 introduced ambitious 
targets to reduce Scotland’s emissions by at least 80% 
by 2050. As well as domestic emissions, Scotland was 
the first country in the world to include a fair share of 
emissions from international aviation and shipping in its 
targets and to mandate that Scotland achieve its goals 
by domestic effort alone.
//
As well as setting the statutory basis for emission 
reductions, the Act additionally requires all public 
bodies in Scotland who appear on the ‘Major Player’ 
list to submit an annual report on compliance with their 
climate change duties. Local government has made a 
political commitment to combatting climate change, 
through the Covenant of Mayors for Climate and 
Energy. The full scale of such activity is captured in the 
annual reports produced as part of the public bodies 
reporting duty. The reports set out progress made with 
reducing carbon emissions and adapting to climate 
change across the public sector including the National 
Health Service, local authorities, transport authorities, 
government agencies and universities and colleges. 
The reports are published on the Sustainable Scotland 
Network website.
//
In 2018, Scotland became one of the first countries to 
respond to the United Nations Paris Agreement with 
legislation when it introduced the new Climate Change 
Bill to the Scottish Parliament in May 2018 to raise the 
ambition of its domestic emissions reduction targets in 
line with the Agreement. The targets in the Bill have 
been further updated in response to the publication 
of the Committee on Climate Change’s advice to set 
a legally binding target of net zero greenhouse gas 
emissions by 2045.
//
Policies and proposals through which Scotland’s 
statutory emissions reduction targets from 2017-2032 
will be met are set out in the Scottish Government’s 
third Climate Change Plan (RPP3), published in 
February 2018. The policies and proposals in the Plan 
include plans for the energy, buildings, transport, 
industry, waste, land use, land use change and forestry, 
and agriculture sectors. This Plan will be updated six 
months after the new Climate Change Bill receives 
Royal Assent.
//
The Scottish Government has also set up a Just 
Transition Commission to provide Ministers with 
practical advice on decarbonising in a way that it fair 
for all.
//
Scotland’s first five-year climate change adaptation 
programme from 2014 addressed over 130 climate 
risks through around 150 individual policies and 
proposals. The second five-year programme will be 
published in 2019.
//
Specialised support on climate adaptation is provided 
through the Adaptation Scotland Programme, 
funded by the Scottish Government and delivered 
by sustainability charity Sniffer, which has supported 
important regional initiatives delivering on adaptation 
(for example the Galloway and Southern Ayrshire 
Biosphere Reserve, Climate Ready Clyde, Edinburgh 
Adapts and Aberdeen Adapts) and has increasing 
engagement with the business community. Through 
Adaptation Scotland, organisations, businesses and 
communities are supported to adapt to the impacts 
of climate change through connecting science and 
practice and building partnerships for planning and 
action.
//
Survey data from the Scottish Household Survey 
published in 2018 show that the proportion of young 
people (age 16-24) who see climate change as an 
immediate and urgent problem increased by over half 
from 38% in 2013 to 58% in 2017. Among adults of 
all ages this proportion increased by one third from 
46% to 61% during the same period.438 Examples of 
efforts to improve education and awareness-raising 
include:
• the Royal Scottish Geographic Society developing a 
climate literacy qualification. 
• Public workshops across Scotland in summer 2019 
will inform development of new public engagement 
strategy. 
• 2050 Climate Group’s Young Leaders Development 
Programme gives young people the knowledge, skills 
and opportunities to take climate action. 
• Keep Scotland Beautiful runs the Eco-Schools 
Scotland Programme. 
• ‘Climate Ready Classrooms’ in secondary schools.
//
The Scottish Government will also engage the public, 
communities, businesses, industry and the public sector 
in a discussion about what more can be done.
//
Wales has just consulted on its second Adaptation 
Plan. Wales’s first Climate Change Adaptation Delivery 
Plan sits within the Climate Change Strategy for 
Wales. Published in 2010, it laid the foundations for a 
significant step towards a resilient Wales. Since 2010, 
Wales’s achievements have included the publication 
and implementation of strategies to address flood 
and coastal erosion risk management, completion 
of impact assessments to understand the effects of 
climate change in the historic environment and the 
implementation of a heat-wave plan for Wales.
//
The Environment (Wales) Act 2016 sets a target of 
at least an 80% emissions reduction in 2050 with a 
carbon budgeting framework with five yearly reporting 
cycles. In 2020, the Welsh Government will bring 
regulations to the National Assembly to increase the 
existing 2050 target to 95% and change Wales’s 
interim targets and carbon budgets as necessary. In 
December 2018, the National Assembly for Wales 
passed regulations for interim targets (for 2020, 2030 
and 2040) and Wales’s first two carbon budgets. 
Prosperity for All: A Low Carbon Wales Delivery Plan, 
was launched in March 2019 which sets out how 
Wales will meet its first carbon budget (2016-2020). 
The Plan sets out 100 policies and proposals, broken 
down by all portfolios, which demonstrate collective 
Cabinet commitment to accelerate the transition to a 
low carbon economy in the years ahead. The National 
Assembly for Wales declared a climate emergency in 
May 2019 and the Welsh Government is reviewing the 
2050 target following developments in climate science.
//
The Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015
establishes Public Service Boards (PSBs) for each Local 
Authority in Wales, made up from representatives 
of public bodies including Local Authorities, Health 
Boards, Fire and Rescue and Natural Resources 
Wales. Each PSB must improve the economic, social, 
environmental and cultural well-being of its area by 
developing a Well-being Plan, and each plan must 
be informed by a Well-being Assessment. The Act 
requires PSBs to take the latest Climate Change Risk 
Assessment into account when developing their Well-being Assessments.
//
Wales supports many activities that provide 
opportunities for young people to contribute to 
tackling climate change, including the EcoSchools 
programme which, in 2017/18, 97% of all Welsh 
state schools were registered on - one of the highest 
participation rates in the world.
//
That “children and young people develop as ethical, 
informed citizens who consider the impact of their 
actions when making choices” is one of four purposes 
of the new curriculum for Wales. The new curriculum 
will challenge and support learners to make informed 
decisions that affect their world and well-being. The 
choices they make depend on many factors, including 
moral viewpoints and personal beliefs. However, 
robust evidence provides a solid foundation on which 
to base decisions. As ethically informed citizens, they 
will need to consider the impact of their actions and 
technological developments on Wales and the wider 
world, with the aim of having young people who are 
ethical, informed and valued members of society.
//
The Welsh Government Energy Service has invested 
over £60 million of zero-interest loans across the public 
sector in Wales between late 2015 and early 2018 and 
also supported the delivery of a further £27.5 million 
of energy and energy efficiency projects, where finance 
was secured from alternative routes. The carbon 
savings within the current carbon budget period alone 
is estimated to be close to 53,000 tonnes. The service 
is on track to deliver business case targets of 2.5 million 
tonnes of total carbon dioxide savings from measures 
installed and will save the public sector over £650 
million in avoided energy costs over the life of the 
assets installed.
//
Many businesses are already maximising the cost-saving opportunities of clean growth. Wales’s 2017 
Economic Action Plan (EAP) sets out the range of 
actions the Welsh Government is taking to drive 
inclusive growth and prepare for the challenges and 
opportunities of the future. Decarbonisation is a clear 
and consistent thread throughout the EAP and features 
strongly in Wales’s approach for delivering direct 
support for businesses, including through the Welsh 
Government’s Economy Futures Fund. To access direct 
financial support through the Economy Futures Fund, 
businesses must demonstrate that they share Welsh 
Government values (the Economic Contract) and that 
they are delivering investment that is future proofing 
(the Calls to Action). As part of the Economic Contract, 
the Welsh Government tests businesses’ attitude to 
managing and lowering their carbon footprint, whilst 
decarbonisation forms one of five Calls to Action 
designed to target future proofing investment.
//
Achieving Green House Gas reductions requires actions 
to be taken across all Northern Ireland departments. 
The Northern Ireland Executive established the Cross 
Departmental Working Group on Climate Change 
(CDWGCC) in 2010. The group is chaired by the 
Department for Environment, Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs Minister and is made up of senior officials from 
all Northern Ireland government departments.
//
In Northern Ireland, improvements in energy 
efficiency, fuel switching and improvements in 
landfill management (including methane capture and 
oxidation systems) have driven decreases in greenhouse 
gas emissions in the energy supply, residential and 
waste sectors.
//
The first Northern Ireland Climate Change Adaptation 
Programme (NICCAP1) was published in January 2014 
and provided the Northern Ireland strategic objectives 
in relation to adaptation to climate change for the 
period 2014-2019. The second NICCAP contains 
the Northern Ireland government’s response to the 
relevant Northern Ireland risks and opportunities. It 
incorporates lessons learnt and findings of an end-of-programme evaluation of NICCAP1. It also takes 
on board the findings of independent assessments 
from the Committee on Climate Change and the UK 
National and the Scottish Climate Change Adaptation 
Programmes.
//
Northern Ireland’s Department for Agriculture 
Environment and Rural Affairs supports Climate 
Northern Ireland (Climate NI). Climate NI is an intersectoral network devoted to increasing understanding 
of climate change impacts and risks within Northern 
Ireland and promoting the adaptation actions necessary 
to address these. It is governed by a Steering Group 
composed of organisations from government and 
local authorities, businesses, voluntary communities 
and academia. It aims to share good practice, increase 
the understanding of the impacts of climate change 
in Northern Ireland, share knowledge, promote action 
and provide independent advice. Climate NI provides 
a vital link between the voluntary and community 
sectors, private business sectors, academics and 
government.
//
In the 2015 Paris Agreement, the UK and other 
developed countries reaffirmed their collective 
commitment to mobilise US$100 billion of climate 
finance a year by 2020 from public and private sources 
to help developing countries mitigate and adapt to 
climate change. To that end, the UK committed in 
2015 to provide at least £5.8 billion of climate finance 
to developing countries to 2020 and achieved an even 
split between mitigation and adaptation in 2016 and 
2017. This will equate to a doubling of 2014 climate 
finance in 2020, making the UK one of the largest 
contributors of climate finance in the world.
//
The UK uses this climate finance to support developing 
countries to adapt and be more climate resilient, take 
up low carbon development and tackle deforestation. 
The ICF also addresses environmental challenges 
through the application of nature-based solutions.
//
Without urgent action, climate impacts could push an 
additional 100 million people into poverty by 2030. 
By 2050, it could mean as many as 143 million people 
will become internal climate migrants.440 Women and 
girls will be disproportionately affected by the effects of 
climate change. Under the International Development 
Act 2014 and in line with the UK Aid Strategy and Paris 
Agreement, the UK is committed to prioritising the 
needs of women and girls throughout UK development 
spending.
//
A key objective of UK climate finance is to improve 
the effectiveness of the international climate finance 
architecture. This includes building in-country 
capability and enhancing country ownership for low 
carbon, climate-resilient development. The UK PACT 
(Partnerships for Accelerated Climate Transitions) 
programme is a £60 million fund to build capacity and 
capability of public, private and civil society institutions 
to reduce carbon through technical assistance in 
countries eligible for Official Development Assistance 
(ODA).
//
The UK is working internationally to reduce costs 
and accelerate the deployment of low carbon 
technologies. The UK works to strengthen the market 
for Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) in developing 
countries, financing the first full-scale power plants in 
South Africa and Morocco, driving down technology 
cost for CSP in Morocco by 50%.
//
The Renewable Energy Performance Platform 
(REPP) programme works to mobilise private sector 
development activity in small to medium-sized projects 
in sub-Saharan Africa. It is supported with £148 million 
government funding and managed by Camco Clean 
Energy. To date, REPP has committed US$13.1 million 
in co-financing for the development of 16 active 
projects covering a wide range of technologies, from 
solar homes systems to grid-connected solar farms and 
run-of-river hydropower plants.
//
Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariffs Program (GET FiT) 
supports the development and completion of small-scale on-grid renewable energy projects in Uganda to 
help avoid an energy shortfall and promote private 
sector investment. The UK has invested £49.6 million 
in GET FiT and leveraged €400 million in public and 
private investment. Plans are underway to see if it could 
be replicated in 10 neighbouring countries.
//
The UK is a world leader in providing finance for 
climate resilience and aims to spend 50% of the ICF on 
programming to build capacity to anticipate, adapt to 
and absorb or cope with shocks and stresses related to 
climate and climate change.
//
Building Resilience and Adaptation to Climate Extremes 
and Disasters (BRACED) builds the climate resilience 
of vulnerable communities across Africa and Asia. 
Projects range from helping traditional livestock herders 
mitigate the impact of drought through to helping 
farmers develop ‘climate-smart’ agricultural production 
techniques. The programme has already helped over 5 
million people.
//
The UK’s Hunger Safety Net Programme (HSNP) in 
Kenya aims to reduce hunger and vulnerability by 
providing the poorest households in Kenya with regular 
cash transfers. HSNP reaches over 600,000 people 
(60% women) with regular, electronic cash transfers of 
approximately £20 a month, every two months directly 
into their bank accounts.444 During times of drought, in 
response to a satellite-based trigger from the national 
early warning system, it can scale up to cover up to an 
additional 1.2 million people with emergency electronic 
cash transfers, directly into their bank accounts. It is 
quicker, faster and cheaper than humanitarian aid and 
is now part of Kenya’s National Safety Net Programme 
to which the Government of Kenya is committing its 
own resources.
//
Partnerships for Forests (P4F) supports public-private 
partnerships across Africa, South East Asia and Latin 
America, providing support to develop new sustainable 
business models, which support development, jobs 
and livelihoods, without causing deforestation. In 
Liberia, P4F is Working with the Royal Society for 
the Protection of Birds (RSPB) to develop ‘rainforest-friendly’ chocolate, providing sustainable livelihoods 
for poor local communities and helping to protect the 
Gola Forest. In Ghana P4F works with Touton, a French 
cocoa trading company, to increase sustainable cocoa 
production, benefiting up to 150,000 people while 
protecting the Bia National Park.
//
The majority of financing globally for low carbon 
and resilient infrastructure will need to come from 
private sources. Therefore, a policy priority for the 
UK is to grow and integrate green finance across the 
finance and professional services sector domestically 
and overseas through a combination of policy and 
regulatory action, ODA spending and diplomatic 
efforts.
//
In 2017, the UK government endorsed the Financial 
Stability Board Taskforce on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD) recommendations and launched 
a UK Green Finance Taskforce to look at actions 
government and regulators could take to accelerate 
the growth of green finance, including enhanced 
disclosures.
//
Additionally, the UK government will be investing £20 
million in a new clean tech-focussed venture capital 
Clean Growth Fund and has been working with the 
private sector and the British Standards Institution 
to develop a set of voluntary sustainable finance 
management standards as well as co-chairing an ISO 
Sustainable Finance Technical Committee.
//
The UK has taken a leading role in accelerating the 
global green finance agenda. For example, seven of 
the twenty members in the European Commission’s 
High-Level Expert Group on sustainable finance 
were from the UK. Furthermore, the UK and China 
jointly established the G20 Green Finance (renamed 
Sustainable Finance) Study Group in 2016, and the 
UK Treasury was a founding member of the Coalition 
of Finance Ministries for Climate Action. Through its 
partnerships the UK is also developing green finance 
markets around the world; providing technical 
assistance in countries such as China, Mexico and 
Colombia.
//
In July 2019, a new Green Finance Institute will be 
launched with £3.95 million of public and private 
funding over three years with a mandate to:
• convene and coordinate green finance activity across 
the UK and between UK and international actors.
• promote the take-up of green finance across the 
finance sector in order to finance the delivery of 
UK policy priorities, including the UK government’s 
Clean Growth Strategy and 25 Year Environmental 
Plan.
• enhance understanding and engagement with the 
risks and opportunities of the low carbon transition, 
and the alignment of financial flows with the Paris 
Agreement.
//
In summer 2019, the UK government will publish its 
Green Finance Strategy which will set out its ambitions 
accelerate the growth of green finance within the 
public and private sector across the UK and globally.
//
The UK has spearheaded important global initiatives. 
For example, working with Canada, the UK established 
the Powering Past Coal Alliance in 2017 – a voluntary 
coalition of national and sub-national governments, 
businesses and other organisations committed to 
ending the use of unabated coal power within a 
timeframe compatible with the Paris Agreement. Since 
its launch in November 2017, the Alliance has so far 
attracted over 80 members, comprising 30 national 
governments, 22 sub-national governments and 28 
businesses or organisations.
//
Failure to act on climate change will have serious 
consequences both in the UK and internationally. 
The impact of climate change is already having a 
disproportionate impact on the world’s poorest 
communities. Without concerted global action to 
limit the extent of climate change and anticipate and 
manage its impact, there are risks of reversals to global 
poverty reduction and the drastic loss of biodiversity 
and healthy ecosystems. The UK will co-lead a 
Resilience Initiative at the UN Climate Action Summit 
in September 2019 to raise ambition on climate action 
globally.
//
Some 1.3 billion people—about 20% of the global 
population—rely on forests and forest products 
for their livelihoods and poorer communities are 
disproportionately dependent on healthy ecosystems.447
Integrating global efforts on nature and climate 
change, including through the application of nature-based solutions, can help to realise the contribution of 
ecosystems to climate mitigation and adaptation. Such 
approaches can also better support countries in their 
sustainable management of land and marine resources 
and associated biodiversity.
//
UK achievements to date have been substantially driven 
by significant decarbonisation of the power and waste 
sectors and this success now needs to be replicated 
across the economy, particularly in the transport, 
business and industry sectors which account for almost 
half of current emissions.
//
Scotland’s overall contribution to tackling climate 
change will be based upon a shared understanding 
between government, society and business of what 
needs to be done. Whilst Scotland has already made 
great strides in delivering on Goal 13, delivering the 
transformative changes that are needed will require 
a fundamental shift across all sectors of the economy 
and all parts of society. This offers social and economic 
opportunities, but it is also important to recognise that 
there will be risks and challenges to overcome.
//
The Welsh Government will be publishing its Final 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan later this year, setting 
its third carbon budget in 2020 and second Delivery 
plan around emissions reduction in 2021.
//
Progress in reducing Northern Ireland’s greenhouse 
gas emissions requires action to be taken across 
all Northern Ireland departments. The Committee 
on Climate Change (CCC), an independent body 
established under the Climate Change Act 2008, 
has been commissioned to complete a report on 
the options, strategies, measures and schemes that 
can be considered if Northern Ireland is to reduce 
its greenhouse gas emissions in the 2020s. A 
comprehensive mid-programme review of NICCAP2 
will also be needed.
//
The New Climate Economy, a major international 
initiative established by the UK and six other countries, 
produced a report448 noting the high levels of 
investment that will be required in coming years to 
meet climate and development objectives, estimated 
at around US$90 trillion up to 2030. Much of this will 
need to come from private sources, and UK financial 
expertise can play a key role in mobilising this green 
finance investment need. The UK co-chaired the G20 
Green Finance Study Group and placed clean growth at 
the heart of its Industrial Strategy. In total, the London 
Stock Exchange in May 2019 had more than 100 green 
bonds listed, raising over US$26 billion.
//
Clean growth also requires breakthroughs in clean 
technologies. Public sector funding and innovations in 
universities are crucial to this, but such breakthroughs 
also need the creativity and energy of the private 
sector.
//
The UK is determined to reduce marine pollution 
to levels that do not cause significant harm to the 
marine environment and has implemented effective 
measures, including bans or restrictions on use, to 
manage the input of contaminants and nutrients into 
the marine environment. The UK has largely achieved 
Good Environmental Status (GES) for eutrophication 
(excessive nutrient richness in a body of water 
exacerbating plant growth) and contaminants, and 
reduced concentrations of hazardous chemicals.
//
The UK is tackling sources of marine litter, including 
the introduction of one of the world’s toughest 
bans on microbeads and is working through 
OSPAR (the Convention for the Protection of the 
Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic), the 
International Maritime Organization and with other 
countries to implement marine litter action plans.
//
In England, the plastic bag charge (introduced in 
October 2015) has seen a significant drop in the 
consumption of single-use carrier bags. The seven 
key retailers have distributed around 15.6 billion 
fewer single-use plastic bags since the charge was 
introduced.453 In 2018, the UK announced that from 
April 2022 it would introduce a world-leading new 
tax on the production and import of plastic packaging 
with less than 30% recycled content, subject to 
consultation. The UK government has since announced 
that bans on the distribution and/or sale of plastic 
straws, stirrers, and plastic stemmed cotton buds will 
come into force in April 2020.
//
The UK is a global leader on the implementation of 
marine planning and the regulation of activities in the 
marine area. The UK Marine Strategy Programme of 
Measures, its marine plans, marine licensing regime 
and the implementation of management measures in 
the UK’s extensive network of Marine Protected Areas 
(MPAs) are all contributing to Global Target 14.2. 
MPAs are areas of the ocean where human activity is 
managed for conservation purposes.
//
In 2019 there were 355 MPAs in UK waters, over half 
of all MPAs within the north east Atlantic network. 
With those designated in 2019, they now cover 25% 
of the UK’s domestic waters, more than double the 
10% target (14.5). All sites are protected through 
the licensing and planning process from the point they 
are consulted on, and fisheries management measures 
have been or will be developed for each of the sites.
//
The UK’s marine plans give regulators and marine users 
a framework to make decisions. The UK’s marine plans 
support sustainable development of the marine area, 
whilst protecting the environment and ensure coastal 
communities and the wider public benefit from clean, 
healthy, safe, productive, and biologically-diverse seas.
//
The £20 million Blue Belt Programme is on track to 
protect over four million km² of marine environment 
across UK Overseas Territories by 2020. Providing 
access to technical expertise, practical surveillance 
and technological solutions it ensures all MPAs are 
based on robust data, legislation and enforcement. It 
is trialling the use of satellite surveillance, combining 
data from multiple sources to identify vessels acting 
suspiciously, and tackling Illegal, unreported and 
unregulated (IUU) fishing particularly in remote places 
lacking the capability to effectively patrol waters with 
ships or planes. In 2016, MPAs were established around 
the Pitcairn Islands (834,000 km2) and St Helena 
(446,000 km²).
//
A global leader on ocean acidifications science, the 
UK is committed to increasing cooperation including 
through global networks that stretch into the waters 
around the Arctic that are particularly susceptible to 
acidification. In 2017 the UK published a synopsis of 
its 6-year ocean acidification research programme 
which identified the impact of ocean acidification as a 
multiple stressor. Working with OSPAR, Commonwealth 
partners and the Global Ocean Acidification Observing 
Network (GOA-ON), the UK takes a leading role 
coordinating and improving monitoring efforts at a 
national, regional and global level. Through GOA-ON, 
the North East Atlantic Ocean Acidification Hub was 
established in the UK (2018). It will act as the European 
regional centre on monitoring and research, primarily 
within the North East Atlantic region, complementing 
regional hubs around the world.
//
The UK has made significant progress in introducing 
sustainable fisheries measures, including landing 
obligations, gear subsidies and incentives, accreditation 
schemes, and area-based management measures. 
UK fish stocks now show signs of recovery following 
historic over-exploitation.
//
The International Council for the Exploration of the 
Sea applies the maximum sustainable yield (MSY) 
approach (maximising the average long-term yield from 
sustainable stocks) to produce advice and assessments 
for fish stocks. Efforts to increase data collection and 
follow scientific advice have paid off: the number of 
stocks fished in line with MSY, and the overall number 
of stocks with enough data collection to go through 
MSY assessments, has increased significantly in the 
past thirty years. The percentage of fish stocks that the 
UK has a direct interest in (including Nephrops), fished 
at or below levels capable of producing MSY has much 
improved from 12% (1990) to 53% (2015).
//
All quotas are now set based on catches rather than 
landings in line with the landing obligation, whereby 
all quota species must be landed and counted against 
quota unless specific exemptions apply. Phased in since 
2015, it was fully implemented from 1 January 2019.
//
The UK is committed to ending the wasteful practice of 
discarding fish. It is working with the fishing industry, 
environmental NGOs and other EU Member States to 
continue adjusting fishing practices to avoid unwanted 
catches of bycatch species from economically important 
mixed fisheries while developing and implementing 
management approaches to further increase selectivity 
through technical and spatial measures.
//
Scotland is a maritime nation with a sea area that is 
six times bigger than the land mass and a coastline 
that stretches over 18,000 km.459 41% of Scotland’s 
population live within five kilometres of the coast460
and marine industries directly contribute at least 
£3.8 billion gross value added (GVA) to the economy 
annually.
//
In 2020 Scotland will celebrating a year of Coast and 
Waters. Scotland has some of the most beautiful 
and diverse marine ecosystems in the world and it is 
committed to protecting and enhancing these amazing 
ecosystems to ensure they are safeguarded for future 
generations to enjoy. Scotland’s vision is for clean, 
healthy, safe, productive and diverse seas that are 
managed to meet the long-term needs of nature and 
people.
//
The marine environment in Scotland is covered by two 
key acts, “the Marine Acts”: the Marine (Scotland) 
Act 2010 which covers its inshore waters, and the 
Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 (MACA) which 
covers the offshore waters. The Marine Acts support 
better management of the competing demands on 
marine resources. Using powers in the Marine Acts, the 
National Marine Plan (2015) was adopted to ensure 
increasing demands for the use of Scotland’s marine 
environment are managed, economic development of 
marine industries is encouraged, and environmental 
protection is incorporated into decision-making.
//
Scotland’s Marine Atlas, published in 2011, provides 
information for the National Marine Plan and an 
assessment of the condition of Scotland’s seas. It is 
based on scientific evidence from data and analysis, 
supported by expert judgement. A new assessment of 
Scotland’s seas is due for publication in 2020.
//
The Marine Strategy Regulations 2010 apply in all 
of Scotland’s seas and provide a framework for 
management, monitoring, and assessment of the 
environmental status. This involves managing human 
activities to ensure the marine environment remains in 
a healthy state that can provide ecosystem services to 
current and future generations.
//
The Scottish Government has launched a dialogue with 
key stakeholders on the future management of Scottish 
sea fisheries. Marine Scotland has initiated an in-depth 
consultation through the Scottish Sea Fisheries National 
Discussion Paper to develop Scotland’s future approach 
in partnership with stakeholders.
//
Scotland is working towards achieving MSY for all 
stocks, though there are significant challenges in 
achieving this in a mixed fishery.
//
Scotland’s National Marine Plan and Marine Licensing 
ensures sustainable development in the marine 
environment. Specific action is taken to develop and 
manage the MPA network and put in place measures 
and strategies to protect specific species. Protected 
areas are used to ensure protection of some of the 
most vulnerable species and habitats. The Scottish 
MPA network includes sites for nature conservation, 
protection of biodiversity, demonstrating sustainable 
management, and protecting Scottish heritage. In total, 
the network covers approximately 22% of Scottish 
seas and as a whole is representative of the range of 
biodiversity and geodiversity found in Scotland’s seas.
//
Wales aims to make a leading contribution to the UN 
Clean Seas campaign. In 2017, it brought together a 
diverse range of conservation organisations and NGOs, 
such as Keep Wales Tidy and the Marine Conservation 
Society, to form the Clean Seas Partnership, which 
worked together to develop Wales’s first Marine 
Litter Action Plan. The Plan has been designed with 
prevention, collaboration and long-term solutions as its 
core principles and it sets out positive actions to help 
reduce and prevent litter from entering the marine 
environment and will support the achievement of GES.
//
Wales’s marine and coastal environment supports social, 
business and conservation interests, from the UK’s only 
coastal National Park in Pembrokeshire, the UK’s first 
coastal Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (Gower), to 
the world renowned Menai Strait in North Wales which 
is home to Halen Mon Anglesey Sea Salt. It is therefore 
vital it remains protected and well-managed.
//
Working with Welsh and other UK stakeholders, Wales 
is currently developing strategic planning policies in 
the first ever Wales National Marine Plan covering the 
inshore and offshore areas. Taking a 20-year view, it 
provides guidance for all decisions which affect the 
marine area. It aims to manage increasing demands 
for the use of the marine environment; support the 
sustainable economic development of marine sectors; 
and incorporate environmental protection and social 
considerations into decision-making. As such, it 
supports coastal communities at the local level and 
drives national economic growth in a sustainable way.
//
The Environment (Wales) Act 2016 and the Sustainable 
Management of Natural Resources policy reflects 
Wales’s commitment to the management of natural 
resources in a proactive, sustainable and joined-up way. 
Such ways of working are aligned with achieving the 
Well-being of Future Generations Act (Wales) 2015 
goals and objectives.
//
Wales is committed to achieving and maintaining GES, 
in line with the UK Marine Strategy. The UK Marine 
Strategy sets out how Wales will achieve or maintain 
GES on a six-year cycle. It outlines key strategic targets 
and, more specifically, its ambitions for delivering 
GES in Wales, which are set out in the programme of 
measures. By taking these actions, the Welsh marine 
environment will continue to remain productive and 
resilient for future generations. To better understand 
the health, condition and resilience of its seas, Wales is 
also working with partners to develop a prioritised and 
affordable marine biodiversity monitoring programme.
//
A commitment to marine ecosystem resilience will 
be a key consideration in shaping future fisheries 
management policy for Wales, creating a framework 
which protects and secures benefits from sustainably 
managed fish stocks.
//
Wales intends to improve long-term sustainable fishing 
measures by: reducing sector fragmentation; giving 
fishers greater management responsibility over the 
coastal environment; and improving sector organisation 
and representation. The Welsh Government is 
developing a Fisheries Evidence Plan with work 
underway to assess the current state of the scientific 
knowledge for Wales’s most important commercial 
species and stocks.
//
The biological, ecological and fisheries data gaps 
identified through this plan will be addressed 
through surveys, assessments and analysis. The Welsh 
Government is working with the fishing industry to 
explore these issues in more detail and will review 
what initiatives are put in place to deliver long-term 
sustainable fishing that does not negatively affect the 
marine environment.
//
Although the emergence of new unfished areas is 
unlikely due to Wales’s long history of fishing, it is 
possible through natural circumstances or climate 
change that new stocks may become abundant in 
coming years. Planning will focus on improving the 
economic strength of the Welsh fishing industry, the 
long-term sustainability of key shellfish stocks and, 
over time through the negotiation of a greater share of 
stocks, diversification into other established species.
//
There are 139 Marine Protected Areas (MPA) in 
Wales,464 covering 69% of Welsh inshore waters 
and 50% of all Welsh waters, far exceeding the 
10% target. Given the extensive coverage, Wales is 
committed to delivering a well-managed network of 
MPAs and is focussed on maintaining and improving 
the condition of the network. To enable this, MPA 
management is steered by an agreed long-term 
vision and objectives under the ‘Marine Protected 
Area Network Management Framework for Wales 
2018-2023’. Coupled with this, annual Action Plans 
provide strategic, prioritised actions for delivery by 
management authorities with statutory responsibilities 
in relation to MPAs. Wales’s MPAs make a significant 
contribution towards an ecologically coherent UK 
network of MPAs. Wales has recently established a 
Task and Finish Group to identify potential Marine 
Conservation Zones in the Welsh inshore and 
offshore areas, that can address a small number of 
gaps in ecological coherence within the network. 
It will continue to fulfil this commitment by using 
the combination of powers available through the 
Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 and the various 
Regulations implementing the Birds and Habitats 
Directive.
//
Dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN), which consists of 
nitrate, nitrite and ammonia is an important indicator 
of marine nutrient status, as nitrogen is the most 
important nutrient in limiting marine algal growth. 
Excessive levels of marine nutrients can lead to local 
imbalances of marine phytoplankton (planktonic 
blooms) and macroalgae (seaweeds), a process known 
as eutrophication. By impacting the dissolved oxygen 
concentrations of the water column, it can lead to 
fish kills and the localised smothering of other marine 
macroalgae and animals, particularly in intertidal areas.
//
In Northern Ireland, levels of winter DIN have been 
monitored consistently at 24 marine water bodies 
since 2012. The levels remained relatively stable 
between 2012 and 2016. In 2017, winter DIN fell to 
a low of 20.82µM (micrograms), showing a potential 
5.6 µM decrease on the 2015 baseline year. This is 
encouraging; however, many years of data are required 
to assess whether this is a positive trend. Northern 
Ireland will continue to implement measures in the 
second cycle ‘River Basin Management Plans’ and 
support other programmes and strategies aimed at 
improving water quality.
//
The UK government supports several international 
initiatives and programmes that help deliver Goal 
14, and it has reaffirmed its commitment to the 
Goal, including in the UK government’s 25 Year 
Environment Plan.
//
Agreed in 2018, the Blue Charter is a commitment 
by all Commonwealth countries to work together on 
ocean issues and sustainable ocean development. Nine 
Blue Charter Action Groups have been established 
to deliver its ambition, of which the UK has joined 
five: coral reef restoration; mangroves; MPAs; ocean 
acidification; and ocean and climate change.
//
Alongside Vanuatu, the UK co-leads the 
Commonwealth Clean Ocean Alliance (CCOA), a 
Blue Charter Action Group. Recognising that plastic 
pollution cannot be solved by governments alone, the 
CCOA brings together businesses and NGOs to share 
best practice, leverage funding and encourage global 
action. It calls on Commonwealth countries to pledge 
action on plastics, be this by a ban on microbeads, a 
commitment to cutting down single-use plastic bags, 
or other steps to eliminate avoidable plastic waste.
//
To help deliver this, the UK committed up to up to 
£70 million million between 2018-22 to drive research 
and innovation, develop sustainable manufacturing, 
and support developing countries to stop plastic from 
entering the ocean in the first place. This includes: 
up to £10 million of technical assistance for CCOA 
members, a £25 million Commonwealth Marine 
Plastics Research and Innovation Framework; up to 
£6 million to fund urban waste management pilot 
projects until 2021; £6 million for the Commonwealth 
Marine Litter Programme, which supports ODA-eligible 
Commonwealth countries to develop national marine 
litter plans; and £2.4 million of investment for the 
Global Plastic Action Partnership, hosted by the World 
Economic Forum, bringing businesses, international 
donors, governments, community groups and experts 
together to tackle plastic pollution.
//
Through the UK’s International Climate Fund (ICF) 
over £10 million has been committed between 2016-
23 to design and introduce a model of sustainable 
development for mangrove habitats. The project will 
reduce mangrove deforestation, create sustainable 
livelihoods, and increase climate resilience in poor 
coastal communities. It will support community health 
and women’s empowerment by providing training 
and access to family planning services. Highlights 
from the first two years include over 6,000 hectares 
of mangrove forest protected or under sustainable 
local management and over 500 people trained and 
supported through alternative livelihoods such as bee-keeping and cucumber farming.
//
In 2018, £12.75 million of ICF funding was committed 
to support sustainable mangrove projects in Latin 
American and the Caribbean. The fund will mobilise 
public and private sector investment to support projects 
in the blue carbon sector, including sustainable fisheries 
and eco-tourism, alongside restoring or protecting up 
to 6,000 hectares of mangroves.
//
This programme supports 17 Small Island Developing 
States (SIDS) in identifying the potential of, and 
developing, their marine economies in a sustainable, 
resilient and integrated way. It promotes growth, 
innovation, jobs and investment whilst safeguarding 
healthy seas and ecosystems. Working with SIDS 
governments, it supports the development and 
implementation of national Maritime Economy Plans. 
It will maximise and protect livelihood opportunities 
for the poorest, reduce gender inequality and engage 
youth through education and training initiatives as part 
of the knowledge exchange activities (see Goal 5).
//
Achievements since launching include: priority clean-up 
activities and coastal planning in the Solomon Islands 
and Vanuatu by identifying marine litter and pollution 
hotspots (Global Target 14.1); and development of 
sustainable tourism in Fiji (Global Target 14.7).
//
The ocean does not respect regional or international 
boundaries. Working together, across the devolved 
administrations, the Overseas Territories and with 
global partners is key to ensure progress continues 
beyond 2030.
//
Marine litter, particularly plastic, remains a key 
challenge domestically and globally; and is expected 
to increase further. It is apparent on UK beaches, in 
the water column and on the seafloor. OSPAR’s first 
assessment of seabed litter showed plastics to be 
widespread on the seafloor. It will take time and effort 
to address this, requiring behavioural changes from 
households, businesses and throughout supply chains.
//
The 2017 OSPAR Intermediate Assessment, which 
included the status of marine pollution in UK waters 
and wider North-East Atlantic, showed that since 
2010 contaminant concentrations have decreased in 
the majority of areas assessed, especially man-made 
chemicals like PCBs. Although concentrations are 
generally below levels likely to harm marine species in 
the areas assessed, they mostly have not yet returned 
to background levels. Concerns remain in some 
localised areas with respect to high levels of mercury, 
lead, and CB118 (one of the most toxic polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCB) congeners) and locally increasing 
concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and 
cadmium in open waters.
//
To help tackle marine pollution, in May 2019 England 
confirmed a ban on plastic straws, drinks stirrers, and 
plastic-stemmed cotton buds will come into force in 
April 2020. Scotland is also working to reduce the 
input of litter into the marine environment by banning 
the manufacture and sale of plastic-stemmed cotton 
buds, and actions to follow the guidelines in the 
European Strategy for Plastics (applicable UK-wide).
//
In Northern Ireland, data (from 2017) shows soluble 
reactive phosphorus in rivers is rising again with a 
negative impact on river water quality. While the 
increase is marginal, it is concerning that there are 
early signs of an upward trend despite the measures 
deployed to reduce pollution from agricultural sources. 
It is likely that pressures will have increased in 2018 due 
to an increase in the use of concentrate feeds following 
low grass yields (see Goal 12.)
//
While UK fish stocks show signs of recovery from 
over-exploitation, recovery of fish populations has 
not been consistent across all UK regional seas. The 
UK is committed to ensuring that all fish stocks are 
recovered to and maintained at sustainable levels, will 
continue to apply the MSY when setting or agreeing 
total allowable catches, and will promote fishing within 
MSY ranges in line with international scientific advice 
on mixed fisheries. The UK will work closely with 
neighbours to ensure the sustainable management of 
shared stocks.
//
The UK will take advantage of the opportunities 
offered by leaving the EU to bring in a world-class 
fisheries management system based on the principle 
of MSY and an ecosystem approach to fisheries 
management to restore and protect the marine 
ecosystem. The Fisheries Bill472 will provide the legal 
framework for the UK to operate as an independent 
coastal state under UNCLOS after exiting the EU and 
the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP). It will restate the 
UK’s commitment to sustainable fisheries, including 
on MSY. After leaving the EU and the CFP, the UK will 
publish an annual assessment of the state of stocks 
of interest to the UK. If particular stocks struggle to 
recover and fall below safe biological limits, the UK will 
work with all interested parties to implement recovery 
plans, ensuring they are restored to a healthy condition.
//
In March 2019, Scotland launched a national discussion 
paper on the future of fisheries management and 
Northern Ireland continues to develop long-term 
management plans for fisheries in the Irish Sea by 
working with the UK Fisheries Administrations and the 
Commission, through CFP reform and Marine Strategy 
Framework Directive. This will help ensure more stocks 
are fished at MSY each year, with the aim to get all 
stocks there by 2020.
//
The UK remains committed to the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) ambition to end fisheries subsidies 
that contribute to overcapacity, overfishing, and illegal, 
unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing.
//
While significant progress has been made against 
the 10% MPA target, continued management is 
necessary to ensure objectives are met and to ensure 
compliance with measures in place for the protection 
of habitats and species. Work to fully implement MPA 
management measures and monitor effectiveness is 
ongoing. Moving away from the Common Fisheries 
Policy to UK legislation when managing offshore MPAs 
will enable more reactive action and faster mitigation 
of risks.
//
The UK will move to a whole-site approach to 
protect sites of greatest biodiversity interest. Future 
management will adapt to changing pressures 
placed on the marine environment, including climate 
change. Work on the MPA network in Scotland will 
focus on completing the network and implementing 
management measures. Alongside this, monitoring 
and assessment of what the network is achieving for 
biodiversity will continue.
//
The UK will also ensure marine plans are in place for 
the whole of the UK marine area by March 2021 
and will continue to implement a marine licensing 
regime that supports sustainable development and 
environmental protection (Global Target 14.2). Wales 
is currently developing the Wales National Marine Plan
which takes a 20-year view on how to increase the 
sustainable use of its seas.
//
The UK is participating in international negotiations to 
develop an international agreement under UNCLOS 
to conserve and sustainably manage biodiversity of 
areas beyond national jurisdiction, and regulations to 
manage the sustainable exploitation of seabed mineral 
resources.
//
At the upcoming Convention on Biological Diversity 
Conference of the Parties in 2020, the UK is looking 
to agree to triple the current Global Target for MPA 
protection, so that 30% of the global ocean is within 
MPAs by 2030.
//
It is also creating an International Ocean Strategy which 
will guide its international work to deliver Goal 14. 
It will explain that through effective conservation and 
sustainable management and the development of 
clean technologies and sustainable marine industries, 
everyone can sustain the ocean’s life-support role and 
support the blue economy while meeting the Goals 
by 2030.
//
Significant progress has been made with protecting 
and managing ecosystems, and widespread habitat 
losses in the last century have slowed. The extent of 
UK protected areas on land has increased by 12,900 
hectares (2013) to 6.84 million hectares (2018), and 
site condition has improved.
//
Many species have seen long-term declines in 
abundance and distribution, particularly during the 
1970s and 1980s. Against this backdrop, some species 
like cirl bunting, red kite and some species of bats are 
showing signs of recovery.
//
Global Targets for Goal 15 are closely aligned with 
the ‘Aichi’ targets under the Convention on Biological 
Diversity’s (CBD) global action plan. The Aichi targets 
are a mixture of outcome and process targets covering 
the status of biodiversity and actions taken to conserve 
it. As part of its commitment to the CBD, in 2019 the 
UK published an assessment of progress against these 
targets.475 Across the 20 Aichi targets: five are assessed 
as on track to achieve the target, including: integration 
of biodiversity into planning and development of 
national accounting; extent of protected areas; and 
increasing the scientific base and knowledge transfer 
related to biodiversity. 14 are assessed as progressing 
but at an insufficient rate to meet the target, including 
rate of loss, degradation and fragmentation of natural 
habitats; conservation of threatened species; and 
addressing priority invasive species; and one had no 
assessment made as the target is not relevant to the UK.
//
Alongside the Global Indicators, the UK has developed 
more detailed UK indicators to report progress 
towards the Aichi targets (2011-20). For example, an 
indicator of pollinator distribution has been developed 
which can assess progress with halting biodiversity 
loss (see data box). In England, a new set of metrics is 
being developed to measure progress towards the UK 
government’s 25 Year Environment Plan (see Goals 3, 
12, 13, 14, and 17).
//
Invasive non-native species (INNS) are key drivers of 
biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation. The GB 
Invasive Non-Native Species Strategy sets out actions 
to introduce measures to prevent the introduction, and 
significantly reduce the impact of INNS on land and 
water and control or eradicate priority invasive species. 
It follows internationally-recognised principles of 
prevention, rapid eradication and management.
//
The first GB pathway action plan for zoos was 
published in 2016 to raise awareness and strengthen 
management of INNS introduction pathways. 
Contingency plans have been drafted for terrestrial, 
freshwater and marine species. Two amphibians and 
two fish species have been eradicated, with more 
national-scale eradications ongoing including Ruddy 
duck, Monk parakeet, Water primrose and Topmouth 
gudgeon.
//
The UK secured £2.75 million funding during 2016-
20 for two projects to support the 16 UK Overseas 
Territories from the threat from INNS. The first develops 
comprehensive biosecurity for the Overseas Territories 
by providing them with access to UK government 
expertise. The second contributes to the RSPB-led 
eradication of mice from Gough Island in the South 
Atlantic. Each year, mice kill over a million seabird 
chicks and are the main threat to the endangered 
Tristan albatross and Gough Island bunting.
//
Tree pests and diseases also accelerate biodiversity loss 
and ecosystem degradation. England’s Tree Health 
Resilience Strategy includes a proactive approach to 
biosecurity, with landowners, charities, the public 
and government working together to build resilience 
against pests and diseases.
//
Britain has more ancient oak trees than the rest of 
Europe combined,478 with over 2000 other species 
dependent on it,479 but they face threats from climate 
change, pests and diseases. Action Oak, launched in 
2018, is a partnership charity aiming to raise funds to 
combat these threats (see Goal 17).
//
To protect the economic, social and environmental 
benefits from woodland creation and management, 
the UK government is ensuring: public forests and 
woodlands are kept in trust for the nation; stronger 
protection for ancient woodland; and a duty on local 
authorities to consult before felling street trees.
UK woodland extent has risen slowly from 12.4% 
(2004) to 13.1% (2018) of total land area (3.17 million 
hectares in 2018).
//
In England, £2.9 billion is being spent on agri-environment schemes through the 7-year Rural 
Development Programme, to support land 
management and rural development; and over £50 
million annually to manage over 1 million hectares 
of protected sites. In total, Natural England estimates 
that management is in place to create an additional 
130,000 hectares of wildlife-rich habitat outside 
protected sites (2011-18).
//
Countryside Stewardship (and existing agreements 
under Environment Stewardship) financially incentivises 
farmers and land managers in England to protect the 
natural environment by: conserving and restoring 
habitats; managing flood risk and reducing water 
pollution; creating and managing woodland preserving 
historical features; and encouraging educational access 
(see Goals 6, 11, 12, and 13).
//
The UK government’s 25 Year Environment Plan 
will deliver a new framework for peat restoration in 
England. In April 2018, £10 million was allocated to 
four large-scale peatland restoration projects across 
England, supporting the restoration of 6,580 hectares 
of diverse upland and lowland peatlands (see Goal 13).
//
The National Planning Policy Framework for England 
was updated (July 2018), to clarify that development 
should provide net gains for biodiversity and to 
strengthen protection for irreplaceable habitats like 
ancient woodland.
//
Net gain is an approach to development aiming to 
leave the natural environment in a measurably better 
state than beforehand. Across England, there has been 
voluntary adoption of net gain approaches. England 
has committed to mandating ‘biodiversity net gain’ for 
development, including housing and infrastructure, and 
is implementing an innovative approach to protecting 
great crested newts in the planning and development 
process (see Goals 9, 11, and 13).
//
In England, £2.6 billion is being invested in the flood 
protection capital programme (2015-21) delivering more 
than 1,500 projects to better protect 300,000 homes.
A further £1 billion is being invested to maintain existing 
defence schemes. Natural Flood Management measures 
are included in many of these schemes and play a key 
role in the flood risk reduction strategy. To demonstrate 
these benefits, the UK has invested: £4.1 million in 
three projects (2009-15); and £15 million on 26 large 
catchment scale projects and 34 community projects 
(2017) (see Goals 9, 11, and 13).
//
Scotland has a range of laws and plans in place relating 
to this Goal including on land use and forestry. The 
level of ambition in the targets and global challenge 
of biodiversity loss is recognised. Scottish Planning 
Policy sets out that planning should seek benefits for 
biodiversity from new development where possible, 
including the restoration of degraded habitats and 
the avoidance of further fragmentation or isolation of 
habitats.
//
In 2018, Scotland’s woodland area covered 18.5%483 of 
its total land area with targets to increase this to 21% 
by 2032.484 In Scotland, the commitment to manage 
these woodlands according to the international 
principles of sustainable forest management (SFM) 
has been formalised under the Forestry and Land 
Management (Scotland) Act 2018, which places a duty 
on Scottish Ministers and Scottish public authorities to 
promote SFM.
//
58% of Scotland’s woodlands have been independently 
certified485 as being sustainably managed, and the 
woodland area is expanding. In 2017/18, 7,200 
hectares of new woodland was created,486 and over 
3,000 hectares of native woodland established. 68.1% 
of native woodland features in protected areas were in 
good condition.
//
Scotland’s Forestry Strategy 2019-2029 sets out a 10-
year framework for action, including activities to ensure 
woodlands are sustainably managed, expanded, and 
the environmental benefits they provide enhanced.
//
Progress on halting biodiversity loss will be measured 
in great part by Scotland’s success or failure in meeting 
a key set of targets: the Aichi targets as part of the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. This is a 
ten-year framework for action by all countries and 
stakeholders to save biodiversity and enhance its 
benefits for people. This and the Global Strategy 
for Plant Conservation targets are both part of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). Scotland, 
like many other countries, is facing the challenge of 
declining biodiversity and is currently reporting a mix of 
successes and challenges.
//
Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) reported that seven 
Aichi targets are assessed as being on track; 12 are 
showing progress but requiring additional action if 
Scotland is to meet these targets by 2020; and only 
one of the 20 targets, related to funding, is moving 
away from target.
//
Other data on biodiversity show a more granular 
picture. The Scottish Biodiversity Strategy: Report to 
the Scottish Parliament 2014-2016 (2017), contains 
a summary of Biodiversity State Indicators. Of the 
current indicators in the report, three (abundance of 
terrestrial breeding birds; notified species in favourable 
condition; notified habitats in favourable condition) 
were considered to be improving, three (wintering 
waterbirds; breeding seabirds; butterflies - specialists) 
were worsening, and one was stable (butterflies - 
generalists).490 A subsequent report has found that 
specialist butterflies long-term trends are stable 
compared to when records began in 1979.
//
According to the 2016 State of Nature Report, 
Scotland’s current biodiversity health status suggests 
that “ecosystems may have fallen below the point 
at which they can reliably meet society’s needs”. The 
same report highlights that 520 Scottish species are at 
risk of extinction in Britain, due to pressures such as 
human activities and climate change.
//
Scotland is home to around one third of the EU’s 
breeding seabirds and their status is an important 
indicator for assessing the state of the marine 
environment. The average breeding numbers of 12 
species of breeding seabirds in Scotland have declined. 
By 2016, breeding numbers of these species were 62% 
of their 1986 level.
//
The official statistics report on protected areas 
condition states that invasive species constitute ‘the 
single biggest negative impact on feature condition’ in 
Scotland. Island ecosystems are particularly vulnerable 
to INNS impacts, a major concern given the important, 
protected biodiversity that Scotland’s islands host. 
Rhododendron ponticum, originally from Spain, is the 
main INNS threat to terrestrial biodiversity, especially 
woodlands. Rhododendron ponticum forms dense 
thickets, shading out flowering plants, bryophytes and 
lichens, and preventing tree regeneration. SNH and 
Scottish Forestry have drawn together the experiences 
and outcomes of past and current projects to create 
a national strategy that identifies priority areas for 
rhododendron control associated with woodland in 
Scotland, and to produce supporting information 
and guidance. Public and private land managers are 
working together in several areas of Scotland, including 
Glen Creran in Argyll and Torridon. Funding is available 
through the Forest Grant Scheme to support such work 
in priority areas.
//
The Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 
2011 enabled Scotland to adopt the internationally 
recognised three-stage approach to dealing with 
invasive non-native species, which aims to:
• prevent the release and spread of non-native animal 
and plant species into areas where they can cause 
damage to native species and habitats and to 
economic interests. 
• ensure a rapid response to new populations can be 
undertaken. 
• ensure effective control and eradication measures 
can be carried out when problem situations arise.
//
Scotland is working with partners across the UK to 
minimise the risk posed, and the negative impacts 
caused, by INNS in Scotland and action to address this 
is coordinated across the UK, particularly across Great 
Britain. The GB Programme Board, gives strategic 
consideration of the threat of INNS across Great 
Britain. Much of the work carried out is underpinned 
by the Great Britain Invasive Non-Native Species 
Strategy, which the Scottish Government launched in 
partnership with Defra and the Welsh Government in 
2015.
//
The following two groups have been set up in 
Scotland:
• the Non-Native Species Action Group, to ensure 
effective policy co-ordination and practical 
implementation in Scotland. 
• the Statutory Group on Non-Native Species, to 
oversee the use of new statutory powers and 
coordinate work between the statutory bodies with 
specific responsibilities for non-native species in 
Scotland.
//
Wales covers a land area of 2,078,224 hectares,
which supports agricultural industry and provides 
homes to a variety of wildlife. Wales’s natural resources 
underpin its well-being and its prosperity, health, 
culture and identity. With legislation, it has embedded 
biodiversity and natural resource management into 
policy. For instance, the Environment (Wales) Act 2016 
ensures natural resources and ecosystems are resilient 
and can provide benefits now and for the future.
//
However, progress has been slow. The State of Natural 
Resources Report, produced by Natural Resources 
Wales, highlighted that no ecosystem in Wales is 
currently showing all the attributes of resilience, which 
is impacting its ecosystems to provide benefits.
//
Work is underway to remedy this. For instance, the 
Natural Resources Policy sets Wales’s priorities for the 
sustainable management of natural resources. These 
include: delivering nature-based solutions; increasing 
resource efficiency and renewable energy; and taking a 
place-based approach. Through this, Wales is ensuring 
that the national priorities for sustainable management 
of natural resources also inform local delivery.
//
The Woodlands for Wales strategy outlines the 
commitment to bring more Welsh woodland into 
management, expand its cover and increase its 
resilience so they can deliver more benefits to the 
people of Wales. In the past it adopted a target of 
planting 100,000 hectares of trees between 2010-30. 
Planting rates in the first seven years of that period 
have only been a fraction of the required 5,000 
hectares per year. However, Wales aims to increase tree 
planting to at least 2,000 hectares per year and will 
increase this to 4,000 hectares as rapidly as possible 
(see Goals 6, 11, 12, and 13).
//
The total area of peat soil in Wales is approximately 
90,995 hectares (4.3%). Drainage, land use change, 
inappropriate grazing, burning and air pollution have 
all damaged and degraded Welsh peatlands. Over 70% 
of peatlands were estimated to have been modified 
and in degraded condition. This has negatively 
impacted their ability to deliver a range of ecosystem 
services. Wales continues to invest in tree planting and 
peatland, recognising the well-being benefits they 
provide, and committed to increase the Land Use, 
Land Use Change and Forestry sink in Wales by the 
year 2030 by reducing carbon loss from peatlands and 
building carbon stores within biomass (see Goal 13).
//
Taken together, the National Planning Policy and the 
National Development Framework sets Wales’s national 
planning context and supports the delivery of the 
Natural Resources Policy at the national level. At the 
local level, Natural Resources Wales’s area statements 
will provide a vital local evidence base for the 
sustainable management of natural resources, which 
local authorities must have regard to in their local 
development plans. The National Planning Policy, Wales 
provides for continued protection for Best and Most 
Versatile Agricultural Land (see Goals 9, 11, and 13).
//
Flooding and coastal erosion are two of the most visible 
effects of the changes in Wales’s climate. The National 
Strategy for flood and coastal erosion risk management 
sets out how Wales will help communities, the public 
sector and other organisations to work together to 
manage flood and coastal erosion risk.
//
Wales will consult on a new National Strategy in July 
2019 further supporting the use of natural flood 
management and adaptive measures, strengthening 
its stance on prevention and complementing new 
planning policy and Welsh legislation.
//
Wales funds schemes run by local authorities and 
Natural Resources Wales to reduce risk of flooding and 
coastal erosion to communities. Between 2016- 21 it is 
investing almost £152 million capital funding in flood 
and coastal erosion risk management schemes. This 
is in addition to the £150 million investment through 
the Coastal Risk Management Programme, with 
construction starting from April 2019 for three years 
(see Goals 9, 11, and 13).
//
In Northern Ireland, the Forest Service safeguards the 
plant health status in support of maintaining productive 
agricultural, horticultural and forest industries, and 
to protect the wider environment. In 2017 the Plant 
Health Directorate published the Northern Ireland Plant 
Health Risk Register.
//
The register identifies and prioritises for surveillance 
and action the highest threats to plant health status. It 
is publicly available online and benefits from a revised 
generic Plant Health Contingency plan published 
by Forest Service in 2017. It is in close collaboration 
with the rest of the UK Plant Health Services to 
better predict, plan and prepare for plant health pest 
outbreaks.
//
Northern Ireland’s peatlands have been designated as 
Special Areas of Conservation and contribute to its 
protected area network. Plans are being developed 
which will identify measures to maintain or improve 
sites’ condition and help increase the percentage of 
protected peatland under favourable management. In 
2017, Northern Ireland (alongside the border region of 
Ireland and Western Scotland) received European Union 
INTERREG VA Programme funding including for €4.9 
million for restoration of 2,228 hectares of blanket bog 
across the three countries including Garron Plateau in 
County Antrim.
//
Biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation are global 
issues, requiring global solutions. The 2019 Global 
Assessment from the Inter-Governmental Panel on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services reported that 
most of the globe’s biodiversity had been significantly 
impacted, with the majority of ecosystems and 
biodiversity indicators showing rapid decline.
//
Internationally, the UK has contributed to the protection 
and restoration of forests and wider biodiversity 
outcomes through funding and resource mobilisation, 
coordinating global action and scientific endeavour. UK 
funding provided in support of biodiversity in developing 
countries, particularly least developed countries and 
small-island developing states, has risen from a baseline 
of £38.8 million of Official Development Assistance 
(ODA) per annum between 2006-10 to over £136 
million in 2015. Provisional ODA figures for 2016 and 
2017 are £108 million and £138 million.
//
The UK demonstrates its commitment to Leave No One 
Behind through its continued investment in the Darwin 
Initiative. Since its establishment in 1992, the initiative 
has awarded £161 million to 1,155 projects that 
preserve and increase biodiversity, across developing 
countries. Applications must focus on sustainable 
development for the reduction of poverty and consider 
gender equality (see Goals 1, 8, 10, and 13).
//
The UK is leading efforts to tackle international wildlife 
trade (IWT) through the prevention of trafficking and 
poaching. It is investing more than £36 million (2014-
21) to take action to counter IWT while also investing 
in wider conservation programmes which will have an 
impact on tackling the illegal wildlife trade.
//
The UK announced one of the world’s toughest 
domestic bans on ivory in April 2018 and in October 
2018 convened the world’s largest Illegal Wildlife Trade 
Conference. Over 1,300 participants took part, with 
representatives of over 400 organisations including 
Standard Chartered, Barclays, Citigroup and BNP 
Paribas, and representatives from over 70 countries. 
Of those countries, 65 adopted the London 2018 
Declaration and significant new commitments were 
also made by the UK, including extra funding for 
counter poaching training for rangers in Africa; funding 
to tackle demand for products from IWT; £6 million 
to support transboundary projects through the IWT 
Challenge Fund; and £3.5 million to help UN Office of 
Drugs and Crime and Egmont Centre of FIU Excellence 
and Leadership develop financial crime investigation 
capacity where IWT-related money laundering may be 
taking place.
//
To tackle climate change globally, the UK established 
International Climate Finance (ICF), investing £5.8 
billion (2016-21) to support developing countries 
respond to the challenges and opportunities climate 
change presents.
//
The UK’s contributions to forest funds through ICF 
support its pledge to Leave No One Behind. It helps 
communities protect and restore important, diverse and 
fragile forest ecosystems whilst using land in ways that 
improve productivity.
//
Through the ICF, the UK has also: 
• Invested £65.1 million in the BioCarbon Fund 
Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes,502 to 
coalesce multiple land-use projects to achieve a 
bigger, landscape-sized transformation.
//
• Invested £56.5 million in the Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund, which 
funds a partnership of governments, businesses, 
civil society, and indigenous peoples focussed on 
reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation, forest carbon stock conservation, 
the sustainable management of forests, and the 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing 
countries.
//
• Established the Forest Governance, Markets and 
Climate Programme, with a budget of £250 million 
(2011-21), to bring about governance and market 
reforms to reduce illegal forest resources use and 
benefit vulnerable people dependent on forests for 
their livelihood (see Goals 10 and 13).
//
In addition, the UK provided £210 million for the sixth 
stage of the Global Environment Facility programme 
(2014-18). In 2018, the UK pledged to give up to £250 
million over four years to support its efforts to tackle 
marine plastic pollution and IWT.
//
The Nagoya Protocol provides a legal framework 
for the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising 
from the use of genetic resources – to ensure donor 
countries and their communities benefit financially 
when companies overseas develop products using 
genetic material from their countries’ plants, animals, 
fungi and microorganisms. Legislation applies to 
sectors including food and beverage; pharmaceutical; 
cosmetic and personal care; animal and plant breeding; 
biotechnology; bio-control and academia.
//
Despite many losses, there are real points of progress 
on which to build. The UK’s challenge is to do just that. 
Leaving the EU presents the opportunity to formulate 
agricultural and forestry policies that better meet UK 
priorities. In England, the challenge will be designing 
a new environmental land management system that 
is the cornerstone of the country’s agricultural policy 
after EU exit, to reward farmers and land managers 
for delivering environmental outcomes and public 
goods such as habitat protection and stimulating public 
engagement with the countryside, supporting health 
and well-being.
//
The European Union (Withdrawal) Act will ensure 
that the whole body of existing EU environmental 
law, including the Habitats and Wild Birds Directives, 
continues to have effect in UK law following the UK’s 
departure from the EU. Following EU exit, Scotland has 
committed to maintain or exceed EU environmental 
standards (see Goals 6, 11, 12, and 13).
//
Across the UK, work is underway to strengthen 
progress on Goal 15. In England, the 25 Year 
Environment Plan is a step-change in ambition for 
wildlife and the natural environment, committing 
to over 200 actions to enhance the environment in 
England and internationally, addressing Global Targets 
across Goal 15 (linking to Goals 6, 9, 11, 12 and 13), 
including:
• replacing the current Biodiversity Strategy with a 
post-2020 Strategy for Nature, more clearly aligned 
with the Pollinator and upcoming Peatland and Tree 
Strategies. To be published in 2019, the England 
Peatland Strategy will create a Lowland Agricultural 
Peat Taskforce. An England Tree Strategy will be 
published in 2020 following consultation.
//
• developing a Nature Recovery Network. 
• developing a new Northern Forest, with 50 million 
trees to be planted over the next 25 years (with 
a further 1 million ‘trees for schools’ announced 
subsequently). By the end of the current Parliament, 
11 million trees are to be planted, including 1 million 
urban trees. Separately, Wales is developing an outline 
of the First Minister’s vision of a national forest. A 
national forest could accelerate reforestation and 
unlock major economic and environmental benefits.
//
• bringing forward an Environment Bill which 
establishes an independent statutory body to 
hold government to account and enshrine core 
environmental principles in UK law.
//
• pledging to eliminate all avoidable plastic waste, 
like microbeads and straws. The UK government 
has introduced one of the world’s toughest bans on 
microbeads, and following an open consultation, a 
ban on the supply of plastic straws, drinks stirrers 
and cotton buds comes into force in April 2020 in 
England (see Goal 14).
//
The Woodland Carbon Guarantee will deliver tree 
planting, helping offset carbon emissions and support 
wildlife. Up to £50 million of guaranteed future 
payments over the next 30 years will be provided to 
those who plant qualifying woodland, to purchase 
carbon credits as trees grow and sequester carbon.
//
Scotland is currently developing a new Environment 
Strategy and Wales is placing climate issues at the centre 
of planning through the development of a Predictive 
Agriculture Land Classification Map (expected August 
2020). The map uses the best available information to 
predict the grade of land and will help local planning 
authorities, developers, surveyors and land use managers 
make informed decisions over the use of land in the 
planning system and to target survey work to the most 
appropriate locations.
//
Northern Ireland is also identifying where necessary 
management measures should be introduced for 
terrestrial and marine protected areas. The focus 
between 2017-22 will be on bringing the protected 
area network into favourable management. The trend 
should improve from 2017 onwards.
//
In response to the global Climate Emergency and 
following the advice from the Climate Change 
Committee, the Scottish Government will be widely 
consulting on the transformational policies needed to 
feed into the update of the Climate Change Plan. It 
will also intensify its commitment under the Biodiversity 
Roadmap 2020 and is committed to helping to shape 
the new post-2020 international biodiversity targets. 
The Scottish Government is working with Scottish 
Natural Heritage to coordinate this thinking, including 
ensuring that there is a sound evidence base on which 
to base future action and to help develop a strategic 
response to new targets.
//
Biodiversity loss is a major challenge facing countries 
around the world. In 2019, the UK announced a global 
review, led by Professor Sir Partha Dasgupta, to assess 
the economic value of biodiversity. Its objective will 
be to quantify the economic benefits of biodiversity 
globally and identify actions that can be taken to 
simultaneously enhance biodiversity and deliver 
economic prosperity. The review is due to report in 
2020.
//
The UK is committed to leading action to develop a 
new post-2020 global framework for biodiversity under 
the Convention on Biological Diversity that is ambitious 
and transformational. It must seek to align with, and 
be informed by, related global frameworks such as 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals 
Management, as well as the Goals.
//
Everyone has a right to feel safe and secure. While 
total crime has fallen since 2015504 there has been a 
concerning rise in some low-volume but high-harm 
violence including knife crime.505 In response to this, 
the UK government is undertaking consultations on 
a legal duty to support a multi-agency ‘public health’ 
approach to violence across the UK, building on lessons 
learned in Scotland. The threat from organised crime, 
which costs the UK £37 billion a year and causes 
more deaths than all other national security threats 
combined, grew.506 2018 saw the launch of the Serious 
and Organised Crime Strategy which outlines how the 
UK government will target organised criminals and 
bring them to justice. And following the appalling 
terrorist attacks in 2017, the UK’s counter-terrorism 
strategy sets out how the UK aims to leave no safe 
space for terrorists to recruit or act.
//
According to the 2017/18 Crime Survey for England 
and Wales, only 64% of women compared to 87% 
of men felt very safe or fairly safe when walking alone 
after dark.
//
The UK’s efforts to combat child trafficking includes 
concerted action which has had an impact at home 
and overseas. In 2016, the Crime Survey for England 
and Wales showed that 16% of respondents aged 
18-29 had experienced assault by the age of 16.508
Ending abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of 
violence against children remains a UK priority. The UK 
has provided £2.2 million through the Child Trafficking 
Protection Fund to test innovative ways to protect 
vulnerable children in the UK and overseas who are at 
risk of being trafficked.509 Independent Child Trafficking 
Advocates an independent source of advice for 
trafficked children will be rolled out across England and 
Wales to help child victims of trafficking, to navigate 
the complexities of the social care, immigration and 
justice systems. This is in addition to an ambitious 
programme of work to address the sexual exploitation 
of children which began in 2015. This was followed by 
the 2017 Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation: Progress 
Report and a £40 million package of measures to 
protect young people and tackle offenders. The 
Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse was also 
established to draw out systemic lessons.
//
The UK has a long tradition of ensuring that rights 
and liberties are protected. There are three national 
human rights institutions: Equality and Human Rights 
Commission (covering England and Wales), Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission and Scottish Human 
Rights Commission.
//
Hate crime goes against the UK’s values of unity, 
inclusivity tolerance and mutual respect. It is important 
to understand who is targeted by hate crime to 
ensure that no one is left behind. In 2017/18, race-targeted hate crimes in England and Wales accounted 
for the largest proportion of offences – 76%. This 
is a long-standing trend. Hate crimes targeted at 
religion accounted for 9% of offences, an increase of 
2 percentage points compared to the proportion in 
2015/16.
//
In 2016, the UK government published an action 
plan to improve its response. It had five themes: 
preventing hate crime by challenging beliefs and 
attitudes; responding to hate crime; increasing 
reporting; improving support for victims and building 
understanding. This corresponded with a fall in the 
prevalence of hate crime experienced.
//
The ability of individuals to resolve legal issues and 
access support when they need it is vital to a just 
society. The Legal Support Action Plan sets out the UK 
government’s approach to support access to justice 
by exploring how it can best help people resolve 
legal problems at the earliest opportunity and avoid 
the need for unnecessary court proceedings, this 
includes investing £5 million in an innovation fund to 
explore how technology can support access to justice; 
doubling funding for litigants in person; ensuring early 
intervention by delivering a series of pilots; and piloting 
an expansion of legal aid to cover early legal advice in a 
specific area of social welfare law. The UK government 
also published a review of legal aid for inquests in 
an effort to seek a more supportive, accessible and 
effective inquest system. The review concluded that 
whilst the vast majority of inquests are inquisitorial and 
fair, there is a need to do more to ensure that inquests 
do not become adversarial; that the coroner is fully in 
control; that the behaviour of lawyers is as it should be; 
and that there is a need to improve guidance literature 
for those navigating the process in an effort to seek 
a more supportive, accessible and effective inquest 
system. The UK government will also ensure inquests 
are more sympathetic to the needs of the bereaved; 
improve family participation; and improve guidance 
and advice available.
//
The UK is striving to make its criminal justice system 
fairer and ensure that it promotes equality. David 
Lammy MP’s 2017 review into racial disparities, 
identified a lack of trust in the justice system among 
black, Asian and ethnic minority people. The review 
highlighted the need to further address barriers to 
access to justice. In October 2018, an update on 
progress outlined plans to tackle racial disparity, 
including: work to improve the diversity of those 
working in the criminal justice system; pilot alternatives 
to prosecution for those who are eligible; and address 
disproportionate outcomes in procedures.
//
Criminal justice agencies work directly with victims of 
crime to ensure they get the help they need. In 2018, 
the UK government published a Victims Strategy to 
improve the experience and rights of victims of crime, 
especially the most vulnerable. The Victims’ Code, 
which sets out the services that victims should receive, 
is being revised to better reflect victims’ needs. The UK 
government will also improve reporting, monitoring 
and transparency to strengthen compliance with the 
Victims’ Code and ensure all victims are able to make a 
personal statement describing the impact the crime has 
had on them and their family.
//
The UK is working to reduce corruption to help build 
strong institutions. In 2017, the UK published its Anti-Corruption Strategy, building on a 2014 action plan and 
a 2016 London summit. In 2017, the Criminal Finances 
Act gave agencies powers to recover the proceeds 
of crime, tackle money laundering and combat the 
financing of terrorism. A 2018 report by the Financial 
Action Task Force (the global standard setter) on the 
UK’s work to tackle money laundering and illicit financial 
flows that finance terrorism was positive – stating that 
the UK has a ‘…robust regime to effectively combat 
money laundering and terrorist financing’. To prevent 
fraud and corruption in government institutions, the UK 
government has invested in a Centre of Expertise for 
Counter Fraud and developed a functional standard for 
all government departments and bodies.
//
Transparency is also key to preventing fraud and 
corruption. The Bribery Act 2010 puts a requirement 
on companies to have in place adequate procedures 
to prevent bribery. This encourages transparency, as it 
is likely to be a prominent feature in such anti-bribery 
procedures.
//
Through the Open Government Partnership National 
Action Plan, the UK is working to improve data 
transparency – a significant step in facilitating 
transparency at all levels. For the first time, data on 
reports of corruption made to police in England and 
Wales is published. This is in addition to public data on 
other crime.
//
For 30 years, the Crime Survey for England and Wales
has provided vital evidence about the changing levels 
of crime and been used to evaluate and develop crime 
reduction policies. In 2016 the Investigatory Powers Act
was overhauled, providing a new framework to govern 
use and oversight of the investigatory powers available 
to law enforcement, security and intelligence agencies.
//
The UK also has comprehensive birth registration 
systems in place and it is a legal requirement to register 
a birth in the UK within 42 days (21 days in Scotland).
//
A driver of Goal 16 is the promotion and protection 
of human rights. Scotland has national human rights 
institutions and a National Action Plan for Human 
Rights which has outcomes that have explicitly 
embedded the Goals. Scotland has a specified National 
Outcome to “respect, protect and fulfil human 
rights and live free from discrimination” and values 
of respecting the rule of law and acting openly and 
transparently in the National Performance Framework.
//
Justice in Scotland: vision and priorities sets out the 
vision for a ‘safe, just and resilient Scotland’ and is 
focussed on improving outcomes for people across 
Scotland, providing an over-arching and consistent 
framework to which everyone across the sector can 
align their efforts.
//
Scotland has become safer over the past decade. 
Overall, levels of crime and victimisation have fallen. 
The Scottish Crime and Justice Survey (SCJS), which 
includes crimes not reported to the police, estimates 
that the overall number of crimes experienced by 
adults in Scotland in 2017/18 has fallen by 42% since 
2008/09, and by 16% since 2016/17 to 602,000, the 
lowest level ever estimated by the survey.511 The SCJS 
also shows that there has been an 11 percentage point 
increase in the proportion of adults who said they 
felt very or fairly safe walking alone after dark in their 
local area, from 66% in 2008/09 to 77% 2017/18.512
Additionally, recorded crime in 2017/18 is at its second 
lowest level since 1974. The total number of crimes 
recorded by the police in Scotland in 2017-18 was 
244,504. Over the past ten years crime has decreased 
and by over a third (35%) since 2008/09 in Scotland.
//
The Scottish Government reported in 2017 that the 
number of people under 18 convicted of handling an 
offensive weapon has fallen by 85% since 2008/09.
Action has been taken to reduce and prevent violence 
through on-going support and investment in the 
Violence Reduction Unit, and specific interventions 
including the Mentors in Violence Prevention Scotland 
Programme, Medics Against Violence ‘Ask, Support, 
Care’ programme, the No Knives Better Lives Programme
and the hospital-based Navigators programme.
//
Over the past ten years the number of victims of 
homicide has fallen by 39% from 97 in 2008/09 to 59 
in 2017/18. Over the same period the rate of homicide 
victimisation fell by 43% from 19 to 11 victims per 
million population. For male victims, this rate fell by 
40% from 28 to 17 victims per million population and 
for female victims the rate fell by 52% from 10 to 5 
victims per million population.
//
The number of sexual crimes recorded by the police 
have increased by 97% over the past ten years from 
6,331 in 2008/09 to 12,487 in 2017/18.516 This long-term rise is due to a range of factors. Part of this trend 
of increased reporting may reflect a greater willingness 
by victims to come forward, including to report crimes 
which may have not taken place recently. Another 
component to the increase of total sexual crime in 
2017/18 is also due to there being 421 new crimes 
of disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate 
image.517 These are as a result of the Abusive Behaviour 
and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 and are new to 
the sexual crime group. Previous Scottish Government 
research highlighted that a growth in sexual ‘cyber-crime’ accounts for a significant proportion of the 
growth in sexual crime in recent years.
//
Domestic abuse remains a prevalent issue – latest 
findings from the Scottish Crime and Justice Survey 
show that in 2016/18 15.6% of adults report having 
experienced physical or psychological partner abuse 
since the age of 16, with women (20.0%) almost twice 
as likely as men (10.9%) to have experienced such 
abuse.518 To tackle this, the Scottish approach is framed 
by Scotland’s Equally Safe strategy.
//
The Equally Safe strategy for preventing and 
eradicating violence against women and girls was 
originally produced in 2014, updated in 2016, and 
further updated in 2018. It focusses on the need for 
prevention of violence and sets out how Scotland 
will develop a performance framework to determine 
whether Scotland is realising ambitions. The Abusive 
Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016 has 
introduced a ‘statutory domestic abuse aggravator’ to 
ensure courts take domestic abuse into account when 
sentencing offenders.
//
In 2015 the Scottish Government published the Serious 
Organised Crime Strategy, which aims to reduce the 
harm caused by serious organised crime by ensuring all 
partner bodies collaborate together.
//
The Trafficking and Exploitation Strategy published in 
May 2017 identifies three areas of action where the 
Scottish Government will focus efforts: Identify victims 
and support them to safety and recovery, identify 
perpetrators and disrupt their activity, and address 
the conditions that foster trafficking and exploitation. 
Sections 9 and 10 of the Human Trafficking and 
Exploitation (Scotland) Act 2015 places a duty on 
Scottish Ministers to provide support and assistance 
to victims of all forms of human trafficking and 
exploitation and of slavery, servitude and forced or 
compulsory labour. This duty came into force on 1 April 
2018. Support and assistance that may be provided 
includes but is not limited to:
• accommodation, 
• day to day living, 
• medical advice and treatment, 
• counselling, legal advice, repatriation; and 
• information about other services available.
//
The Local Governance Review was launched to ensure 
that Scotland’s diverse communities and different 
places have greater control and influence over decisions 
that affect them most. As part of this 4,000 people 
took part in #DemocracyMatters conversations about 
the future of community decision-making.
//
Scotland also supports participatory budgeting as 
a resource to build on the wider development of 
participatory democracy with over 100,000 voting on 
how money is spent in their local community in the last 
two years.
//
The current Scottish Open Government Action 
Plan, was developed in partnership between 
Scottish Government, the Convention of Scottish 
Local Authorities (COSLA) and the Scottish Open 
Government Partnership civil society network to seek to 
reach across the system of public services. The Action 
Plan contains commitments in five areas:
1. Financial performance and transparency.
2. Providing a framework to support systemic change in 
Scottish Government to improve the way people are 
able to participate in open policy-making and service 
delivery.
3. Improvements to the way information and data are 
used.
4. Improving the accountability of public services.
5. Transparency and participation in Scotland as the UK 
exits the EU.
//
Goal 16 highlights the need for people to feel safe in 
their community, and one of Wales’s well-being goals 
aims for safe communities. In 2016/17, the National 
Survey for Wales showed that 73% of people felt safe 
after dark; whether at home, walking in their local 
area, travelling by public transport or travelling by car. 
Around 80% of people felt safe walking in the local 
area or travelling by public transport, while 97% felt 
safe both being at home and travelling by car. In 
addition to the 440 police personnel enforcing law 
and order across Wales, as part of its focus on making 
communities safer, Wales provides specific funding to 
support an additional 500 Community Safety Officers.
//
From the National Survey Wales 2017-2018, a question 
concerning confidence in ability to access the legal and 
justice system revealed that only 18% of respondents 
were very confident that they could access ways to 
resolve legal issues, whether through the advice of 
solicitors, advice centres or through the courts.
//
To support community cohesion eight Regional 
Community Cohesion Teams work across all 22 Welsh 
local authorities. These work at a strategic and local 
level with public services and community organisations 
to break down barriers to inclusion and integration 
across marginalised groups; support migrants, refugees 
and asylum seekers during the integration process; and 
tackle discrimination, hostility, tensions and extremism. 
The teams will be expanded from April 2020 to 
increase their capacity to provide support around issues 
related to the UK’s anticipated withdrawal from the EU.
//
Of the recorded hate crimes during 2017/18 in 
Wales, 68% were reported as race hate crimes, 6% 
were linked to religion, 20% to sexual orientation, 
and 9% to disability.521 Wales funds a Hate Crime 
Reporting and Support Centre, managed by Victim 
Support Cymru, which provides support to victims of 
all categories of hate crimes and incidents. Funding 
for this service has increased and, in addition, a new 
grant fund has been established for organisations 
working with BAME communities at risk of hate crime, 
reflecting the extent to which these communities are 
affected. This new grant is in addition to the existing 
Equality and Inclusion Funding Programme, which 
works across many strands of equality including race; 
gender; disability; Gypsies, Roma and Travellers; LGBT+; 
refugees and asylum seekers as well as hate crime.
//
One in six of all recorded hate crimes in Wales is judged 
to have been related to sexual orientation, though 
Stonewall Cymru research indicates that many such 
incidents are not reported to the police.522 Wales is one 
of three Home Office funded Early Adaptor areas for 
the Independent Child Trafficking Advocates Pilot. The 
Pilot in Wales is operated by Barnardo’s Cymru. From 
January 2017 to 31 December 2018 over 200 children 
across Wales had been referred into the National Referral 
Mechanism and are being safeguarded. The countries 
from where the children are referred include the UK, 
Vietnam, Bangladesh, Albania and Romania. In addition, 
Wales has brought forward legislation to remove the 
defence of reasonable punishment. The objective of 
the Children (Abolition of the Defence of Reasonable 
Punishment) (Wales) Bill is to help protect children’s 
rights by prohibiting physical punishment by parents 
and those acting in loco parentis. The prohibition is 
consistent with Wales’s commitment to children’s rights 
under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (UNCRC). The UNCRC recognises the right of 
the child to “respect of their human dignity, physical 
integrity and equal protection under the law.”
//
The Wales Victim Response Pathway operates across all 
of Wales and incorporates the use of the Multi-Agency 
Risk Assessment Conference process for survivors of 
domestic abuse. It is a victim-focussed information 
sharing and risk management meeting attended by all 
key agencies, where high risk cases are discussed.
//
Wales has introduced legislation to make Welsh law 
more accessible, clear and straight forward to use, and 
is taking steps to improve digital accessibility of the law.
//
Social welfare advice services play a key role in 
ensuring everyone in Wales has access to justice and 
is an important part of strong, cohesive communities. 
Although justice is not devolved, Wales supports social 
welfare advice services to ensure everyone in Wales has 
access to justice. Between April to December 2018, 
these services supported over 47,000 people and 
secured over £31 million in extra money for people 
who claimed welfare benefits.
//
In relation to the National Assembly and Local 
Government elections, Wales’s policy is to empower 
16 to 17-year-olds and all foreign nationals to vote 
in these elections to ensure greater inclusivity and 
promote citizenship. Legislation will also be brought 
forward to ensure the conduct of elections is free from 
bias, and that candidates are not harassed and to make 
it easier to register to vote.
//
Northern Ireland’s approach to peaceful societies is 
underpinned by values such as respect for each other 
and tackling hate crimes in all forms.
//
Addressing the legacy of the past and creating 
space for sharing between traditionally divided and 
new communities in Northern Ireland are particular 
challenges. Results from the 2017/18 Northern 
Ireland Crime Survey (NICS) estimate that 7.9% of all 
households and their adult occupants were victims of 
at least one NICS crime during the 12 months prior 
to interview, unchanged from 2016/17. The rate has 
reduced by almost two-thirds since NICS 1998 (23.0%) 
when the measure was first reported.
//
Goal 16 has been mapped to Northern Ireland’s draft 
Programme for Government’s outcomes and indicators. 
This is supported by various programmes such as the 
Tackling Paramilitarism Programme and Problem-Solving Justice – programmes to address paramilitarism, 
criminality and organised crime; and reducing crime by 
changing behaviours.
//
Problem-Solving Justice (PSJ) is a new strategy which 
adopts a holistic and joined-up approach to dealing 
with and changing behaviour for the better. Its aim is 
to address the specific problems of individual offenders 
and move them onto a different life trajectory. A 
portfolio of PSJ pilots, including Substance Misuse 
Courts and Enhanced Combination Orders are at 
various stages of development.
//
Community relations programmes in Northern Ireland 
also aim to improve both intra and inter community 
relations, create new shared and inclusive spaces, 
promote diversity, inclusion, tolerance, peace, 
reconciliation and appreciation of different cultures and 
traditions.
//
The Tackling Paramilitarism Programme is a series of 
commitments from the Northern Ireland Executive 
aimed at tackling paramilitarism, criminality and 
organised crime. It involves government departments, 
law enforcement agencies, local councils and 
community and voluntary sector partners working 
together. The focus is on robust law enforcement, 
implementing long term preventions measures, 
addressing social issues that affect communities and 
building confidence in the justice system.
//
Violence is one of the biggest obstacles to achieving 
the 2030 Agenda; more than 80% of the world’s 
poorest will be living in countries affected by violence 
and conflict by 2030. The UK has long supported 
progress around the world towards more peaceful, 
just and inclusive societies, and continues to promote 
human rights internationally while meeting obligations 
at home as outlined above. To support further action 
the UK will co-host Goal 16 at the High-Level Political 
Forum in 2019.
//
The UK is committed to tackling the causes of conflict, 
and tackling insecurity and instability is central to 
the UK’s international work to support Goal 16. In 
2016, 57% of the UK’s international development 
department’s budget was spent in fragile states 
affected by conflict.
//
At the UN, the UK plays an active role in delivering 
commitments on inclusion, access, equality and 
rights as the common underpinnings for sustainable 
development and sustaining peace. In 2015, the UK 
kept the international spotlight on the Rohingya crisis 
in Burma, actively supporting UN-led efforts to find 
a political solution and is pursuing a peaceful end to 
conflict in Yemen, Syria, Libya and Somalia.
//
The UK fully endorses the UN Secretary General’s 
Sustaining Peace reforms to improve the UN’s ability 
to prevent conflicts and contribute to stability. In 
2018, the UK doubled its contribution to the UN 
Peacebuilding Fund to £32 million (to 2020), to help 
prevent conflicts. It also launched a National Action 
Plan for Women, Peace and Security which puts 
women and girls at the heart of the UK’s work to 
prevent and resolve conflict, recognising the important 
link to Goal 5.
//
To tackle child sexual abuse and exploitation and 
child trafficking, in addition to the Prime Minister’s 
global Call to Action to End Forced Labour, Modern 
Slavery and Human Trafficking (see Goal 8) the 
UK has increased co-operation with international 
partners. The UK is a founding Board member of the 
Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children, 
and through this landmark movement is driving the 
consensus for change to protect children from all forms 
of violence, abuse and exploitation. Since 2015, the 
UK has driven and funded the WePROTECT Global 
Alliance. This brings together the influence, expertise 
and resources required to transform how online child 
sexual exploitation is dealt with so that it can be better 
addressed. By 2019/20, the UK will have invested £40 
million to tackle online child sexual exploitation.
//
Despite efforts, delivering the promise to Leave No One 
Behind remains a challenge on Goal 16. For example, 
people with disabilities still often face stigma and 
experience discrimination. In 2018, the UK increased 
funding to expand the reach of the Disability Catalyst 
Programme, which supports people with disabilities 
and disabled persons’ organisations to advocate for 
their rights. The 2018 Disability Summit demonstrated 
the UK’s leadership on disability inclusion and led to a 
set of ambitious commitments from governments and 
organisations to give people with disabilities greater 
rights. For more information about disability inclusion 
see Goal 10.
//
The UK is also a vocal champion for LGBT rights in 
international fora and its work overseas. UK Aid 
Connect, a new funding mechanism, includes a 
thematic area on LGBT inclusion. Through this, up 
to £12 million over four years will be available for a 
consortium of diverse organisations – civil society, think 
tanks and private sector – to work on LGBT inclusion 
overseas.
//
As a founding member of the Addis Tax Initiative, 
the UK is committed to working with developing 
countries to build capacity and robust tax systems. The 
UK continues to support better and more transparent 
management of public spending so that citizens can 
see where and how their taxes are being used (see 
Goal 17).
//
The UK is also leading the way in addressing 
corruption, bribery and illicit finance, having launched 
a Business Integrity Initiative to help UK companies 
respond cleanly to trade and investment opportunities 
in developing countries. In 2017, the UK established 
the International Corruption Coordination Centre 
and in 2018 campaigned on international beneficial 
ownership transparency.
//
The UK government takes action against British 
companies and nationals who steal assets or pay 
bribes in developing countries and is making progress 
in implementing the International Action Against 
Corruption programme including, by funding a new 
global Open Ownership Register. Launched in 
April 2017, the Register is making information about 
company ownership globally accessible.
//
With homicides and violence rising, reducing all forms 
of violence in the UK remains a challenge. Later this 
year, the UK will set out a serious violence strategy to 
include further measures to support law enforcement, 
multi-agency working and early intervention and 
prevention.
//
Another priority is safety and security in UK prisons, to 
reduce levels of violence, and reform the youth secure 
estate.
//
The duty to ensure everyone has a right to feel safe 
also extends to those in custody. There were too many 
assaults by prisoners in 2018 (34,223, up 16% from 
2017), too many incidents of self-harm (55,598, up 
25% from 2017) and too many self-inflicted deaths 
(87, up 19% from 2017). To address this, investment 
in prison staff in England and Wales has increased – 
between October 2016 and March 2019, the number 
of prison officers went from 17,955 to 22,630, an 
increase of 4,675 officers.
//
In Northern Ireland, an integrated Care and Justice 
Campus comprising the current Secure Care and 
Juvenile Justice Centres will be established by 2020. 
The Campus will be able to provide short-term 
safe spaces through to longer-term, high intensity, 
therapeutic support for children with serious mental 
health and substance misuse problems. It is envisaged 
that this programme will result in services which focus 
on the needs of young people; work to improve 
opportunities and outcomes; prevent repeat admissions 
to secure care; and divert young people from the 
justice system.
//
Internationally, the underlying causes of insecurity and 
instability are being identified and tackled through the 
UK’s development assistance. The UK will work with 
the UN and Global Counter Terrorism Forum to build 
institutions in partner countries through coordinated 
capacity building. Efforts will focus on new work to 
reduce illicit financial flows and improve global financial 
systems. The UK is scaling up engagement with global 
and regional financial centres to reduce illicit flows 
from developing countries.
//
At home, the UK’s Commission for Countering 
Extremism (CCE) has been established to support 
society in fighting all forms of terrorism. CCE will 
shortly publish a study into the threats of extremism, 
and the current response.
//
Wales is legislating to improve openness, transparency 
and accountability in local government in Wales, 
including providing for the webcasting of council 
meetings, better public access and the electronic 
publication of key statements and documents to 
support Goal 16.
//
The Scottish Government is establishing a Citizens’ 
Assembly to bring together a cross section of Scottish 
society under an independent Convenor to address 
the change Scotland needs in a way that aims to build 
agreement, to debate choices respectfully and in a 
way that seeks maximum areas of agreement. The 
Scottish Government has committed to incorporating 
the principles of the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (UNCRC) into domestic law. The 
Scottish Parliament is currently considering a Children 
(Equal Protection from Assault) (Scotland) Bill, which 
would contribute to ending all forms of violence 
against children.
//
The UK is also strengthening its approach to online 
child sexual exploitation and abuse with an online 
harms strategy to ensure that the system protects 
vulnerable people, supports victims and brings 
perpetrators to justice.
//
Despite the fall in hate crime, the UK is not 
complacent. Challenges include continued underreporting, high rates of attrition in the criminal justice 
system and targeted abuse online. The Hate Crime 
Action plan will continue to run to 2020.
//
The UK has committed to improve the police response 
to LGBT hate crime; raise awareness of support; 
address domestic abuse of LGBT people with complex 
needs; bring forward proposals to end the practice 
of conversion therapy; ensure transgender prisoners 
are treated fairly; and improve access to justice for 
LGBT people as set out in the LGBT Action Plan. The 
UK has also committed to drive positive and practical 
conversations on LGBT equality in the Commonwealth.
//
In Northern Ireland, the Executive Office in conjunction 
with delivery partners are constantly working to identify 
gaps in funding provision and issues affecting the 
uptake of good relations programmes, to ensure need 
is targeted to where appropriate and addresses the 
challenges of reducing hate crime.
//
Online offending is just as serious as off-line offending. 
In 2018, there were 976,000 computer misuse offences 
experienced by the public.531 This figure is a decrease 
on 2017 levels but there is still more to be done. 
Robust legislation will set out how a range of online 
harms will be tackled, including hate crime, with clear 
responsibilities for tech companies to keep UK citizens 
safe.
//
In Wales, in response to calls from a wide range of 
stakeholders, including the Equality and Human Rights 
Commission, for the Welsh Government to do more to 
be done more to safeguard equality and human rights, 
research will shortly be commissioned. This will to 
scope options to achieve such strengthening, including 
consideration of incorporating UN conventions and 
treaties into Welsh law, as well as stronger regulation, 
guidance and monitoring under existing legislation. The 
work, which will be overseen by a stakeholder working 
group, and will take account of a new commitment by 
the Welsh Government to enact the socio-economic 
duty in Part one of the Equality Act 2010.
//
From January 2020, Wales will provide £8.04 million 
funding to support social welfare advice services in its 
third, private and statutory sectors. The services will 
provide integrated advice to individuals on any social 
welfare problems they face, and on early intervention 
and crisis resolution. They will embed capability-building work to ensure that individuals are better 
placed to deal with similar problems in the future.
//
Finally, the UK is committed to the promotion of media 
freedom and the protection of journalists and will host 
an international conference on media freedom in July 
2019. ARTICLE 19 is leading the PROTECT programme 
to pilot responses to shrinking civic space, the pressure 
on independent media and civil society and the data, 
transparency and accountability failures in increasingly 
digital environments, with a focus on Burma, Kenya 
and Malawi.
//
The UK is one of the largest providers of ODA in 
the world and has committed to keep aid untied. 
It committed to invest 0.7% of GNI on ODA from 
2013, and the International Development (Official 
Development Assistance Target) Act enshrined this in 
UK law from 2015. In the calendar year 2017, the UK 
provided £14.1 billion of ODA.
//
However, the level of ambition set out in the 2030 
Agenda means there is an estimated investment gap 
of US$2.5 trillion per year for developing countries 
to deliver the Goals.534 The UK played a significant 
role in shaping the 2015 Addis Ababa Action Agenda 
(AAAA) which provides the global framework for 
financing sustainable development and bridging this 
gap. Donor countries recommitted to achieving the 
UN spending targets on ODA. Moreover, governments 
made a historic agreement to look at wider sources of 
finance to fund the Goals and called for more high-quality global data and better monitoring. The UK 
has responded by pressing the international system 
to better coordinate its support for data, providing 
statistical capacity-building at country level and 
supporting the development of the TOSSD (Total 
Official Support for Sustainable Development) metric, 
which will track resources invested in the Goals.
//
Countries require the capacity to raise revenues and 
direct these towards domestic policies that will achieve 
the Goals. Within the UK, HM Revenue and Customs 
(HMRC) policies aim to maximise the collection of the 
tax and duties that are legally due and bear down 
on tax avoidance and evasion. In 2017/18, £605.8 
billion was generated for UK public services and other 
priorities – a 13% increase compared to levels in 
2015/16 (nominal terms).535 Every year, through the 
UK’s compliance work, billions of pounds are collected 
or protected that would have otherwise been lost to 
the UK through fraud, tax avoidance, evasion and 
non-compliance. In 2017/18, the UK generated £30.3 
billion in compliance yield; 5% higher than the previous 
year.
//
In tandem, the UK is using its expertise to support 
tax systems in developing countries and improve their 
tax-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratios. The UK’s 
approach is to support countries to raise their own 
revenues, in a way that finances public services, enables 
sustainable and inclusive growth and reduces poverty. 
The UK Tax Capacity Building Unit (CBU) provides 
peer-to-peer expertise including advisory support and 
mentoring. A Tax and Development resource centre is 
being developed to inform tax and development policy 
and programming.
//
The UK has also encouraged other donor countries to 
do more. In 2015, the UK government co-launched the 
Addis Tax Initiative (ATI) to improve the transparency, 
fairness, effectiveness and efficiency of tax systems in 
partner countries. ATI members were asked to commit to 
collectively doubling technical cooperation by 2020 and 
supporting domestic resource mobilisation to improve 
development in line with the ATI’s key principles.
//
The UK continues to be a strong advocate on tax for 
development with partner governments, the G7, 
the G20 and international organisations (OECD, 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and 
UN).The UK helps to ensure developing countries 
are represented on an equal footing in international 
tax matters and can benefit from new international 
standards such as the OECD’s Base Erosion and Profit 
Shifting Inclusive Framework and the Global Forum 
on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax 
Purposes, both currently covering over 100 jurisdictions.
//
When the AAAA was agreed, governments also 
acknowledged the critical need to attract private 
finance and direct investment to achieve the Goals. 
The UK government’s Department for International 
Development’s (DFID’s) Economic Development Strategy
(2017) sets out how the UK government works with 
counterparts in developing countries to improve the 
enabling environments for the private sector. The Strategy 
also explains the direction being taken to encourage 
companies to seize new opportunities to provide goods 
and services in these markets and create jobs and income.
//
Development Finance Institutions (DFIs), such as CDC 
Group plc, are playing an increasingly important role 
in supporting private sector development. When a 
DFI invests in a country, it increases the confidence 
of private sector investors who may have otherwise 
perceived the risk to their investment to be too high. 
As CDC’s sole shareholder, the UK government sets 
CDC’s investment policy – outlining which countries 
it should invest in, the standards it must comply with 
as a responsible investor and the financial return and 
development impact performance targets it must reach. 
This oversight enables the UK to direct investment to 
the hardest to reach and most fragile places.
//
As one of the world’s largest capital markets and 
a global centre of financial expertise, the City of 
London is emerging as the key financial centre for 
the developing world. Through the UK’s strategic 
partnership with the City of London and other 
partners, developing countries can borrow on London’s 
capital market in their own currencies, free of the risk 
of currency fluctuation.
//
Remittances are another important resource flowing 
to developing countries. In 2017 alone, US$9.7 billion 
in remittances was sent from the UK.537 Personal 
remittances received by the UK accounted for 0.17% 
of GDP in 2017, broadly unchanged since 2015.
//
Debt and debt service levels remain a challenge to 
financing the Goals in some contexts. They have risen 
across a wide range of emerging market economies 
and low-income developing countries for reasons such 
as adverse shocks (falling commodity prices, exchange 
rate fluctuations and civil conflict), looser fiscal 
policies, and in some cases fraud and corruption. Debt 
sustainability is ultimately the responsibility of sovereign 
nations, but many countries need support to build the 
capacity to manage debt well. The UK has committed 
to contribute £4 million to the World Bank-IMF Debt 
Management Facility, which provides tools that help 
countries assess and plan their debt. The UK is also a 
leading voice in calling for the World Bank and IMF to 
tackle debt vulnerabilities and supports the programme 
of work that was launched in 2018. The UK strongly 
advocates for increased debt transparency from both 
borrowers and creditors and works through the G20 
on sharing best practice amongst creditors, including 
emerging creditors such as China, India and Saudi 
Arabia. In a similar vein, the UK supports the work 
of the Institute for International Finance to develop 
guidelines for the private sector.
//
Trade is critical to a country’s economic growth and its 
ability to finance its development. The UK supports a 
stable global trade regime that is governed by common 
rules and frameworks for resolving disputes and which 
takes due consideration of the concerns of developing 
countries when new global rules are adopted. The UK 
is a strong advocate for the effective functioning of 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) to achieve these 
objectives.
//
The UK government is a large provider of Aid for Trade, 
spending £1.5 billion of ODA in 2017, according to 
the latest OECD figures.539 Aid for Trade programmes 
support the integration of developing countries - 
particularly the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) - into 
the WTO multilateral trading system. The UK offers 
enhanced market access for developing countries 
and assistance to take advantage of this access. For 
example, the UK’s government’s Department for 
International Trade is supporting two-way trade and 
investment between the UK and countries across 
Africa.
//
In the Trade White Paper (October 2017), the UK 
government announced its intention to put in place a 
trade preferences scheme by granting duty-free, quota-free access to 48 LDCs and by granting generous tariff 
reductions to around 25 other developing countries. 
The Taxation (Cross-Border Trade) Act 2018 enshrines 
the commitment into UK legislation.
//
Technology is producing income-generating 
opportunities helping to drive economic growth 
that creates resources for development. Science and 
technology can also offer ideas and potential solutions 
towards achieving the Goals.
//
UK ODA that is being spent on research, technology 
and innovation to deliver development benefits 
has been increasing since 2015 and a whole-of-government approach is being taken to maximise the 
impact of investment. Funds540 have been established 
to prioritise collaboration with global research 
organisations, the development of north-south 
partnerships, and the use of southern partners where 
possible to manage local capacity development and 
strengthen institutional capacity. UK-funded research 
has helped reduce under-5 mortality in Africa,541
developed more productive and nutritious crops to feed 
growing populations,542 and resulted in a strengthened 
arsenal of interventions to tackling infectious diseases 
such as Ebola and malaria.
//
The UK also promotes the development, transfer, and 
dissemination of environmentally sound technologies 
to developing countries.
//
There are a series of Innovation Partnerships between 
the UK and Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa who have 
growing tech sectors. The UK Innovation Partnerships 
team includes expertise from across UK government543
– providing a ‘one stop shop’ of excellence and tailored 
support. They will support the pairing of entrepreneurs, 
businesses, venture capital, and universities with 
African counterparts, helping to equip the next 
generation with the digital skills to succeed.
//
In view of the increasing role that digital technologies 
are playing globally, the UK government has launched 
a Digital Strategy (2018-2020) on ‘doing development 
in a digital world’. This set out ambitious plans to: 
embed good practice in using digital solutions in aid 
programmes; and ensure that the benefits of digital 
technologies are accessible to all.
//
The UK recognises South-South Cooperation (SSC) 
and Triangular Cooperation as important tools to 
achieve the Goals and renewed its commitment to the 
Buenos Aires Plan of Action at the 2019 UN High Level 
Conference on SSC.
//
The UK is deepening relationships with rising powers 
such as India and China who are providing increasing 
levels of aid.
//
Many developing countries are now more interested 
in technical assistance, investment mobilisation and 
partnership rather than traditional grant financing. 
Programmes have, therefore, been established to 
facilitate and improve peer-to-peer development 
partnerships between UK institutions and counterpart 
institutions in developing countries. For example, the 
Partnerships for Development programme is funding 
the British Geological Survey to build capacity to 
manage geological data in four countries.
//
The UK supports a strong and resilient international 
system within which relationships between states and 
institutions are based on rules and agreements. The 
UK uses its membership of the UN and economic, legal 
and security institutions to drive policies and reforms 
that support sustainable development.
//
The UK also works closely with regional bodies. There 
is an enduring partnership with the Commonwealth 
in particular, which is a voluntary association of 53 
independent and equal sovereign states. In April 
2018, the UK hosted the Commonwealth Heads of 
Government Meeting (CHOGM) which agreed a range 
of actions to build a Commonwealth that is fairer, 
more sustainable, more prosperous, and more secure. 
Examples include, amongst others, the Marine Plastics 
Research and Innovation Framework initiative (also 
Goal 14) and the Commonwealth Connectivity Agenda 
for Trade and Investment.
//
The Goals highlight the relationships between policy 
areas. This challenges governments to ensure that 
there is a whole-of-government approach to deliver the 
Goals. Every UK government department has a Single 
Departmental Plan that sets its their priorities and how 
it will contribute to cross-governmental commitments 
such as the Goals. The plans enable progress against 
the Goals to be reported publicly in Departments’ 
Annual Report and Accounts and enable progress to 
be scrutinised by parliament and the public. Single 
Departmental Plans are available on GOV.UK.
//
Coherence in policy-making at the national and 
international levels is also important. Macroeconomic 
stability – a prerequisite for sustainable development 
– requires coherent policy-making on issues such as 
finance, investment and trade at both the national 
and the international level. The UK contributes to 
shaping International Monetary Fund (IMF) policy, 
including on preventative and remedial IMF activities to 
maintain macroeconomic stability. The UK also provides 
substantial funding, including for technical assistance, 
to countries to improve their implementation of fiscal, 
monetary and financial policies.
//
Quality and timely data are vital for enabling all 
to make informed decisions on how best to direct 
resources to deliver the Goals, to monitor progress, 
and to drive accountability. The UK is a strong advocate 
and funder of the Global Partnership for Sustainable 
Development Data (GPSDD), which is a network of 
organisations dedicated to using the data revolution to 
achieve the Goals. GPSDD has developed the Inclusive 
Data Charter (2018) to mobilise political support for 
disaggregated data in order to realise the commitment 
to Leave No One Behind, which the Office for National 
Statistics (ONS), the UK’s statistical authority, and DFID 
have signed up to.
//
In the UK, the ONS – the UK’s statistics agency – is 
responsible for reporting UK data for the global 
indicators to the UN. As of June 2019, the ONS was 
reporting UK data for 74% of the 244 Global Indicators 
(180 Global Indicators).544 The ONS is collecting age, 
sex, disability status, ethnicity, income, geography and 
migratory status for indicators where possible. As of 
June 2019, over 70% of these 180 indicators have data 
for at least one disaggregation.
//
The ONS has a strong international reputation and 
shares its expertise and builds strategic partnerships 
with institutions in developing countries. Activities 
include assistance on the modernisation of official 
statistics, development of quality assurance frameworks 
and data interoperability.
//
The UK also supports statistical capacity building 
in developing countries through other channels 
including the World Bank’s Trust Fund for Statistical 
Capacity Building and PARIS 21. This has assisted 
over 40 countries to produce national plans for 
the development of statistics and supported 
implementation. Other data initiatives include a 
programme to strengthen agricultural statistics across a 
range of countries and a geospatial programme aiming 
to improve population estimates. The UK also provides 
direct support to national statistical priorities which 
would otherwise not be fully funded, for example 
supporting twelve censuses and two population 
estimation exercises in the previous census round.
//
An open and vibrant civil society is a fundamental 
partner in direct delivery and in the promotion of 
inclusive societies and accountability. DFID’s Civil 
Society Partnership Review (2016) reiterated the unique 
contribution of the sector internationally and set out 
an approach to working with civil society organisations 
that boosts the effectiveness of these partnerships. The 
private sector is another essential partner. The chapter 
“Delivering the Goals through shared endeavour” 
provides detail on how different partners are engaging 
and where the UK government is supporting them.
//
Beyond partnerships with individual sectors, the UK is 
using its convening power to develop comprehensive 
alliances that draw together different capabilities. 
During the Global Disability Summit in 2018, the 
UK brought together a range of leaders committed 
to driving a step-change in access to assistive 
technologies. The Assistive Technology (AT) Scale 
Global Partnership was established between DFID, 
USAID, WHO, UNICEF, Clinton Health Access Initiative, 
the Office of the UN Special Envoy for Health, the 
Government of Kenya, the China Disabled People’s 
Federation and the Global Disability Innovation Hub. 
This aims to enable half a billion more people to access 
AT by 2030. In support of this new partnership, a new 
programme, AT2030, will catalyse new technologies 
and service delivery models, spark at least 50 new start-ups and mobilise the private sector to reach at least 9 
million people with AT by 2030.
//
Another example is the ‘Centre for Disaster 
Protection’, established in the City of London in 2018 
in partnership with the World Bank. Through this 
initiative the UK works closely with the private sector 
to reduce the impacts of natural disasters and speed 
up resilient recovery. The Centre sources ideas, tools 
and approaches and in turn provides technical advice 
and support to developing partner governments 
to strengthen their financial risk management for 
disasters. This support helps them to use tools 
like insurance to access rapid, reliable finance in 
emergencies.
//
Under the UK’s devolution settlement, international 
relations remain the responsibility of the UK 
government and the UK Parliament. However, 
the UK government recognises that the devolved 
administrations will have an interest in international 
policy-making in relation to devolved matters. In the 
case of international development, the devolved 
administrations may allocate funds from their budgets 
to international development projects. Where such 
spending meets the definition of ODA set by the OECD 
Development Assistance Committee (DAC), it counts 
towards overall UK ODA spending.
//
Although the majority of targets in this Goal relate 
to UK-wide action, international development is a 
key part of Scotland’s global contribution within 
the international community. In 2016, following 
a public consultation, the Scottish Government 
published Global Citizenship: Scotland’s International 
Development Strategy, which sets out Scotland’s 
contribution to the international community and is 
specifically designed to align with the Goals. The 
strategy is focussed on four partner countries: Malawi, 
Rwanda, Zambia and Pakistan; and has an International 
Development Fund to support and empower those four 
partner countries.
//
Key to the Scottish Government’s approach to 
international development is the concept that 
Scotland can be a global leader in international 
development, providing ethical leadership on issues 
such as climate change. Being a global leader is not 
necessarily just about size in absolute monetary terms, 
but the impact that can be made across government 
policy and through wider involvement. Therefore, 
increasingly, the Scottish Government is focussing 
its international development work through the lens 
of the commitment to the “Beyond Aid” agenda: to 
do no harm, taking a stepwise approach to eliminate 
policy incoherence that would detract from Scotland’s 
international development goals or efforts; and going 
further, identifying policies beyond international 
development policy that can contribute positively to 
development outcomes.
//
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) 
plays a role in international networks working on 
sustainable develpoment, in support of this Goal.
//
The National Performance Framework (NPF), 
Scotland’s way of localising the Goals, was refreshed 
in 2018 following extensive consultation. This refresh 
put increased well-being alongside sustainable 
and inclusive economic growth. It is a holistic 
framework encouraging policy coherence across 
the National Outcomes and related Goals. It is also 
underpinned in law as being for all of Scotland 
and not only government. This approach provides 
a common framework and focus for people and 
organisations to work together to improve the lives 
of people in Scotland. The measurement attached 
to the framework encompasses a range of social, 
economic and environmental indications. Scotland’s 
Open Government Action Plan 2018-20 contains 
complementary commitments on financial transparency 
and improving the way people can understand, 
participate in and influence the work of government. 
Scotland used its first Open Government Action Plan to 
support the alignment of National Outcomes and the 
Goals.
//
The Welsh Government’s new international strategy 
will aim to present Wales to the world as a ‘Creative 
Next Generation Nation’. The International Strategy 
will be founded on a clear set of values which will help 
to present Wales’s face internationally – including a 
commitment to sustainability and future generations, 
the promotion of the principles of Fair Work and a 
fundamental belief in the fact that Wales will achieve 
more to tackle some of the major challenges of 
modern age - digital technology, tackling poverty and 
inequality, taking on environmental challenges and 
climate change, through working together across 
territorial boundaries. The Welsh Government’s 
strategy will include a focus on promoting Wales’s 
global responsibilities through the Wales for Africa 
programme and by demonstrating Wales’s approach to 
global citizenship.
//
Wales is an outward-facing, globally-trading nation 
that believes in promoting and protecting Wales’s place 
in the world, recognising Wales’s responsibilities on the 
world stage and promoting fair and ethical trade.
//
The new Tertiary Education and Research Commission 
brings together all Welsh Government controlled 
research funding to reflect Welsh priorities and link 
research, innovation, skills development and teaching. 
The Life Sciences Hub is being refocussed to accelerate 
change, creating value across the Welsh health and 
care system and make it easier for partnerships to 
develop and thrive. In 2018, Wales’s first dedicated 
science park was opened. Menai Science Park 
within the Anglesey Enterprise Zone brings together 
businesses from the ICT, science and research sectors.
//
The Wales for Africa Grant Scheme is a flagship 
initiative of the Welsh Government’s Wales for Africa 
programme. The scheme enables community groups 
and organisations in Wales to access funding for small-scale projects that contribute to Wales’s delivery of the 
Goals and deliver benefits to Wales and Africa. The 
programme supports people in Wales to take action on 
poverty in Africa.
//
In Wales, the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) 
Act 2015 provides a robust and legal framework for 
policy coherence on sustainable development. It brings 
in key institutions in Wales (the public bodies under the 
Act), changes existing institutions (such as the Auditor 
General for Wales), and creates new institutions 
for the future – the statutory Future Generations 
Commissioner for Wales.
//
The Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 
2015 promotes partnership working by making 
‘collaboration’ and involvement two of five ways 
of working in a sustainable way (the sustainable 
development principle) which public bodies are under 
a duty to consider; and secondly, by establishing 
statutory partnerships covering every local community 
in Wales. These Public Services Boards (PSBs) improve 
joint working across all public services and are legally 
bound to consider sustainable development.
//
Wales also has in place partnerships with the third 
sector, local authorities and businesses and many of 
these partnerships are actively taking action under the 
Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015.
//
The Mutual Investment Model (MIM) has been 
developed to finance major capital projects. The 
MIM will support additional investment in social and 
economic infrastructure projects and private partners 
will be required to adopt the Code of Practice Ethical 
Employment in Supply Chains and establish high levels 
of environmental sustainability. Since the launch of 
the MIM, the United Nations Economic Commission 
for Europe (UNECE) has taken a strong interest in the 
model.
//
Wales’s membership of the Regions 4 Sustainable 
Development network has allowed it to mobilise and 
share knowledge of its experience. Wales was featured 
in the ‘Localizing the SDGs’ report which was prepared 
for the UN High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable 
Development in 2018. Sophie Howe, the first Future 
Generations Commissioner for Wales is also the current 
chair of the International Network of Institutions for 
Future Generations.
//
All statistics from the Welsh Government follow the 
standards defined by the UK Statistics Authority. 
The Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 
2015, has established forty-four national well-being 
indicators to measure progress in achieving the seven 
well-being goals for Wales. This work is led by the 
Chief Statistician for Wales. This work has included 
a mapping exercise to link the Global Targets and 
Indicators to Wales’s well-being goals through an 
online interactive application.
//
In Northern Ireland, the principles of sustainable 
development are embedded in the Northern Ireland 
Executive’s draft Programme for Government. Following 
the suspension of the Northern Ireland Executive in 
March 2017, the draft Programme for Government 
framework has been used as the basis for the Northern 
Ireland Civil Service Outcomes Delivery Plan.
//
A mapping exercise has been carried out to highlight 
how the Outcomes Delivery Plan 2018 - 19 aligns 
with the Goals. The monitoring arrangements for the 
Programme for Government will show how Northern 
Ireland is progressing towards the Goals.
//
The UK will be a strong proponent of global 
cooperation and will continue to protect the rules 
and reforms that are required for the achievement of 
the Goals. The UK will continue to exercise its strong 
voice in international organisations cited throughout 
this Voluntary National Review such as the UN, WTO, 
OECD, and the IMF, and call for due consideration of 
developing countries.
//
The UK will also continue to develop and strengthen 
multi-stakeholder partnerships to tackle specific goals 
and targets. For example, the UK will host a UK-Africa 
Investment Summit in 2020 to mobilise the private 
sector to drive job creation and transformational 
growth in African markets through increased trade and 
investment. The UK will also host a major international 
conference in mid-2020 to raise funds for life-saving 
vaccinations for some of the world’s poorest children. 
The pledging conference will support the global 
vaccination body Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, which 
since 2000 has vaccinated 700 million children in 
the world’s poorest nations, preventing 10 million 
deaths from vaccine-preventable diseases like measles, 
whooping cough and pneumonia.
//
No one organisation, including national governments or 
local authorities, can achieve the Goals alone. Scotland 
has a good partnership infrastructure in place, nurtured 
by the approach of the NPF. The Welsh Government’s 
new international strategy will be founded on a clear 
set of values – including a commitment to sustainability 
and future generations and a fundamental belief in 
the fact that more will be achieved through working 
together across territorial boundaries. Through the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015, Wales 
has put collaboration as a statutory way of working 
under the sustainable development principle. The Welsh 
Government will also strengthen its involvement of 
stakeholders in the implementation of Agenda 2030 and 
the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015
through a re-invigorated forum to drive forward the next 
chapter of Wales’s sustainable development journey. 
But there is more that can be done to work across 
boundaries to make a positive difference and engage 
more people and organisations, including business, in 
delivering the 2030 Agenda.
//
A continuing challenge is sourcing more disaggregated 
data, particularly for groups that are at risk of being 
left behind. Training is a very important ingredient 
of truly inclusive surveys. DFID’s Data Disaggregation 
Action Plan is a living document and as such will be 
monitored, reviewed, refreshed and updated every two 
years in advance of the World Data Forums. The UK 
will invite feedback from partners to help collectively 
better address the challenges of inclusive data. The UK 
will also work with others to assess the individual and 
collective impact of these Inclusive Data Charter Action 
Plans over the coming years.
//
The UK is committed to implementing the Goals and 
the 2030 Agenda at home and around the world. 
Conducting the UK’s first Voluntary National Review 
has yielded many lessons and insights. Hundreds of 
stakeholders from across the UK have been engaged, 
whether by submitting case studies, attending 
stakeholder engagement events or providing feedback 
electronically.
//
While the Voluntary National Review identifies many 
reasons to be proud, it also outlines key areas where 
further action is required and the steps being taken, 
with a clear emphasis on Leave No One Behind. 
This is done throughout the report with each of the 
Goal-specific chapters setting out key challenges and 
identifying clear and actionable next steps that will 
inform continued UK efforts.
//
The Voluntary National Review is not an end in itself, 
but a stepping stone on the journey to 2030. In 
addition to Goal-specific actions, there are a number 
of overarching themes that the UK will continue to 
focus on, including collaboration, data and financing 
for the Goals.
//
The 2030 Agenda is about universal action, with 
governments, businesses, civil society, and individuals 
all doing their bit. The UK’s Voluntary National Review 
makes clear the importance of collective action across 
the UK to fix foundations, act strategically, plan for, 
and adapt to a rapidly changing future. Continual 
innovation is needed to maximise opportunities, 
working collectively and collaboratively.
//
The UK government’s planning and performance 
framework will continue to be refined to increase the 
level of detail on reporting of government activity in 
relation to the Goals.
// 
The UK government will review and further strengthen 
the existing means and mechanisms to oversee 
its contribution to domestic delivery of the Goals, 
building on the Single Departmental Plan process. This 
review will take place as a matter of priority and will 
examine both official and ministerial level structures. 
Given the importance of partnership and cross-sector 
collaboration, an effective mechanism will also be 
established to enhance stakeholder engagement and 
cooperation with government in the domestic sphere.
Relevant Ministerial and official groups, including 
those overseeing Official Development Assistance, 
will continue to support implementation of the Goals 
through the UK’s international work.
//
Internationally, the commitment to spend 0.7% of GNI 
on Official Development Assistance will continue to be 
used to support delivery of the Goals, in accordance 
with the UK Aid Strategy - addressing the root causes 
of extreme poverty by tackling conflict, building 
peace and security, and contributing to inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth. In line with this and 
the promise to Leave No One Behind, between 0.15-
0.2% of GNI is targeted at Least Developed Countries. 
Relevant Ministerial and official groups, including 
those overseeing Official Development Assistance, 
will continue to support implementation of the Goals 
through the UK’s international work.
//
Data which is timely, comprehensive and disaggregated 
is vital to continue to drive progress on the Goals and 
realise the promise to Leave No One Behind. While 
the UK has one of the largest and most developed 
statistical systems in the world, there is more work to 
do. The Inclusive Data Charter Action Plan of the Office 
for National Statistics (ONS) outlines plans for further 
improvements to data reporting. Key activities include:
• supplementing official data with new methods and 
sources, aiming to fill more data gaps using non-governmental data. 
• continuing to increase data disaggregation. 
• ensuring data developments are focussed on 
developing data capacity globally as well as 
domestically. For example, the UK will launch a hub 
of the ONS Data Science Campus (in partnership 
with the Department for International Development) 
that will have a focus on analysis of the Goals.
//
While governments can help lay the building blocks 
for economic development and create enabling 
environments, those actions alone will not come close 
to addressing the US$2.5 trillion annual investment gap 
to deliver the Goals in the developing world. Two key 
areas of focus for the UK are harnessing the potential 
of UK financial services and institutional investors, 
including in the City of London, and maximising the 
opportunity that impact investing and responsible 
investing present.
//
To attract greater participation by private finance 
in the Goals, UK government is working with key 
investors with strong experience in emerging and 
frontier markets. The aim is to design, test and - 
where appropriate - provide government support to 
investment products that allow savers and investors to 
support the Goals, while generating financial returns. 
Opportunities such as the UK’s hosting of the Africa 
Investment Summit in London in 2020 will be used to 
showcase this work.
//
In addition to working with investors, the UK 
government wants to find out more about the 
public’s interest in ethical, responsible, and impactful 
investment practices. People in the UK are among the 
most generous in the world;546 and previous research 
suggests nearly half of pension savers want to invest 
in line with their values.547 The Investing in a Better 
World project is working to build the evidence base 
on the level of customer demand for responsible and 
impact investment, and has conducted a nationally 
representative survey of what the public wants from 
their investments. The findings will be reported in late 
2019.
//
Producing the Voluntary National Review has involved 
working closely with the devolved administrations of 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
//
The Voluntary National Review has been an opportunity 
to review and assess progress within the context of 
Scotland’s National Performance Framework (NPF). 
It has consolidated relationships with NPF delivery 
partners. The process has highlighted gaps, strengths, 
areas where more progress is needed, and it has 
sparked a discussion to drive further action. Given the 
amount of information generated, further detail and 
data is included in a Scottish Supplementary Review 
available at www.nationalperformance.gov.scot.
//
The Voluntary National Review has provided an 
opportunity to take stock of progress, building on 
the ongoing review mechanisms built into the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015, 
including the annual Well-being of Wales 2017-18 
report. It has highlighted where progress has been 
made and also areas of further work. It has also re-engaged stakeholders and provided renewed appetite 
to bring together a stakeholder forum to support 
implementation. There is a commitment to explore this 
further following the Review. Further detail on activity 
in Wales is included in a Welsh Supplementary Review 
available at www.gov.wales. In 2020, the Future 
Generations Commissioner for Wales will prepare a 
Future Generations Report and the Auditor General for 
Wales will also report on duties under the Act, both 
of which will be laid before the National Assembly for 
Wales.
//
The Voluntary National Review has generated closer 
collaborative working relationships in pursuit of the 
Goals. The recently developed Outcomes Delivery Plan
sets out the actions to be taken to improve well-being 
for all - by tackling disadvantage and driving economic 
growth. While progress has been made in many 
areas, there is still much to do and many challenges to 
overcome. Achieving real and lasting success will take 
time as it involves tackling some of the biggest and 
most intractable problems facing society. The linkages 
established between the Outcomes Delivery Plan and 
the Goals, coupled with the insights gained from the 
Voluntary National Review, will provide direction and 
focus moving forward.
//
Preparing for and conducting the UK’s first Voluntary 
National Review has further deepened the UK’s respect 
for and understanding of the Goals. The UK remains 
fully committed to continuing to strengthen and 
enhance efforts on the Goals, both domestically and 
internationally, generating continued concrete action to 
Leave No One Behind.


